--- Page 1 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
Available online 15 December 2023
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose
Improved privacy-preserving PCA using optimized homomorphic matrix 
multiplication
Xirong Ma a, Chuan Ma b, Yali Jiang a,∗, Chunpeng Ge a,c
a School of Software, Shandong University, China
b Zhejiang Lab, China
c Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), China
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Privacy-preserving PCA
CKKS
Homomrophic matrix multiplication
Cloud computing
Machine learning as a service
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a pivotal technique widely utilized in the realms of machine learning and 
data analysis. It aims to reduce the dimensionality of a dataset while minimizing the loss of information. In recent 
years, there have been endeavors to utilize homomorphic encryption in privacy-preserving PCA algorithms for 
secure cloud computing. These approaches commonly employ a PCA routine known as PowerMethod, which 
takes the covariance matrix as input and generates an approximate eigenvector corresponding to the primary 
component of the dataset. However, their performance is constrained by the absence of an eﬃcient homomorphic 
covariance matrix computation circuit and an accurate homomorphic vector normalization strategy in the 
PowerMethod algorithm. In this study, we propose a novel approach to privacy-preserving PCA that addresses 
these limitations, resulting in superior eﬃciency, accuracy, and scalability compared to previous approaches.
We attain such eﬃciency and precision through the following contributions: (i) We implement space and speed 
optimization techniques for a homomorphic matrix multiplication method, speciﬁcally tailored for parallel 
computing scenarios. (ii) Leveraging the beneﬁts of this optimized matrix multiplication, we devise an eﬃcient 
homomorphic circuit for computing the covariance matrix homomorphically. (iii) Utilizing the covariance 
matrix, we develop a novel and eﬃcient homomorphic circuit for the PowerMethod that incorporates a universal 
homomorphic vector normalization strategy to enhance both its accuracy and practicality.
Our privacy-preserving PCA scheme, implemented using our innovative homomorphic PowerMethod circuit, 
surpasses the state-of-the-art approach with an average speedup of 1.9 times on datasets with size 200 × 256. 
Notably, our scheme demonstrates an even more remarkable estimated speedup of 25 times when applied to 
larger datasets of size 60000 ×256, along with an R2 accuracy improvement of up to 0.285, showcasing eﬃciency 
and accuracy that has not been reported by previous approaches.
1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Hotelling, 1933), (Pearson, 
1901) is a widely employed dimensionality reduction technique. It 
enables high-dimensional data mapped to a lower-dimensional space, 
preserving the most essential features while minimizing redundant in-
formation and noise. In essence, when applied to a dataset, PCA aims to 
identify a set of vectors known as principal components which represent 
the directions of maximum variance in the dataset. Subsequently, it be-
comes possible to project the dataset onto these principal components 
to achieve a lower-dimensional representation. PCA is widely adopted 
in data analysis and machine learning, including data preprocessing, 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jiang.yl@sdu.edu.cn (Y. Jiang).
feature extraction, data compression, and visualization. It helps us un-
derstand the relationships within a dataset and provides a simpler and 
more manageable representation.
Due to the signiﬁcance and versatility of PCA, it is leveraged as one 
of the supported technologies in cloud computing services, enabling 
users to perform enhanced data analysis leveraging the computational 
power of the cloud. However, concerns regarding the trustworthiness 
of cloud storage hinder users from directly performing analysis and 
processing of sensitive data in the cloud. Instead, it is needed to incor-
porate privacy protection measures into their data before outsourcing 
it to mitigate the risk of potential attacks from an untrusted cloud 
environment. Speciﬁcally, users and cloud servers can negotiate and 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103658
Received 5 July 2023; Received in revised form 24 October 2023; Accepted 12 December 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
2
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
employ privacy-preserving algorithm routines to process sensitive data 
in the cloud while ensuring privacy. Therefore, the proposition of a 
practical and eﬃcient privacy-preserving PCA technique would greatly 
beneﬁt users by enabling them to perform PCA on sensitive data in the 
cloud.
To provide readers with a more comprehensive understanding of 
privacy-preserving PCA in the context of cloud computing, we illustrate 
the concept with a simple scenario: A resource-constrained user wishes 
to perform machine learning tasks using the platform and computa-
tional resources of a cloud server, where PCA may emerge as a pivotal 
component in the initial phase of model training, particularly when con-
fronted with datasets of substantial complexity, such as those containing 
myriad attributes like images. However, the dataset in question is im-
bued with a sense of privacy, and the user is reluctant to disclose the 
privacy to the cloud. In this predicament, the conventional approach 
of executing PCA on the cloud becomes untenable, given the inherent 
inability to outsource conﬁdential data. Consequently, a meticulously 
crafted privacy-preserving PCA solution should be devised, ensuring 
that the user can execute PCA seamlessly on the cloud, all the while 
guarding the privacy of the dataset.
It is imperative to note that in this paper, our primary emphasis 
centers around the algorithms allowing the user to privately obtain 
the principal components from his or her private datasets leveraging 
the computational resources of the cloud, based on the aforementioned 
cloud computing scenario.
Nevertheless, privacy-preserving PCA can have diﬀerent meanings 
in other contexts or scenarios. In some research, privacy-preserving PCA 
is considered the process of using pre-computed principal components 
to conduct the dimensionality reduction mapping of a private dataset 
(Arnold and Saniie, 2023). This diﬀers from our focus, and the distinc-
tion can be likened to the machine learning terms “training” (principal 
components searching) and “inference” (dataset projecting).
In other cases, researchers consider the scenario of multi-party 
privacy-preserving PCA, where multiple entities each holding a private 
dataset aim to compute the PCA results of the merged dataset with-
out disclosing individual privacy (Liu et al., 2020), (Froelicher et al., 
2023). In this situation, the major goal is to distribute computation 
tasks among multiple parties and preserve privacy for each data owner, 
where a cloud server is not necessarily needed, and privacy-preserving 
PCA may be achieved in a distributed manner among multiple parties.
One possible approach for implementing a privacy-preserving PCA 
technique in our cloud computing scenario involves utilizing homo-
morphic encryption. Homomorphic encryption is an important privacy-
preserving technique that allows computations to be performed on en-
crypted data without decryption. This technology serves to safeguard 
data privacy while preserving data usability, rendering it extensively 
employed in domains such as cloud computing and cross-domain com-
putation. Over the past ﬁfteen years, a class of homomorphic schemes 
based on the Ring Learning With Errors (R-LWE) problem (Lyuba-
shevsky et al., 2010) has rapidly developed (e.g., but not limited to 
Brakerski et al., 2014, Fan and Vercauteren, 2012, Cheon et al., 2017, 
Cheon et al., 2019). These schemes naturally possess SIMD properties 
and support homomorphic addition and multiplication operations. As a 
result, a plethora of privacy-preserving data analysis algorithms based 
on these schemes have emerged, including privacy-preserving PCA 
schemes tailored for cloud service scenarios (Lu et al., 2016), (Rathee 
et al., 2018), (Panda, 2021). These existing homomorphic encryption-
based privacy-preserving PCA methods utilized an iterative algorithm 
known as PowerMethod to compute the dominant eigenvector of the 
covariance matrix of the dataset, which corresponds to the ﬁrst princi-
pal component. This algorithm selects an initial approximation of the 
dominant eigenvector and continually applies the covariance matrix 
transformation to reﬁne its approximation (see Algorithm 1 for detail). 
There are two major limitations among the homomorphic PoweMethod 
algorithms in the previous approaches.
Firstly, these approaches lack the capability to compute the co-
variance matrix homomorphically, the PowerMethod necessitates the 
input of the dataset covariance matrix, but to our knowledge, previ-
ous schemes have not oﬀered a homomorphic solution for computing 
this matrix. Instead, they resort to alternative methods. Some require 
users to compute the covariance matrix locally which burdens the users 
with additional computational tasks and deviates from the original in-
tent of cloud services (Rathee et al., 2018). Others decompose the 
covariance matrix transformation within the PowerMethod into dataset 
matrix transformations to avoid explicit involvement of the covariance 
matrix but introduce extra computational complexity (Panda, 2021).
Secondly, there is a potential loss of accuracy due to the absence of 
a universal vector normalization strategy. In each iteration of Power-
Method, normalization is required to control the length of the vector. 
In the homomorphic context, iterative algorithms are typically used to 
approximate the inverse square root function for normalization. The 
accuracy of these algorithms heavily relies on the selection of param-
eters such as the evaluation interval and the number of iterations. To 
our knowledge, no prior research has presented a universal strategy 
to determine these parameter settings in the realm of homomorphic 
PowerMethod algorithms. Consequently, existing homomorphic Power-
Method algorithms may potentially suﬀer from inaccuracy due to this 
inherent limitation.
1.1. Our contributions
We propose an eﬃcient privacy-preserving PCA algorithm that over-
comes the obstacles above. To achieve this, we make the following 
contributions.
Homomorphic Covariance Matrix Computation with Optimized 
Matrix Multiplication (Section 4, 5): We enhance the eﬃciency of 
a cutting-edge homomorphic matrix multiplication algorithm, both in 
terms of time and space, to render it more apt for parallel comput-
ing scenarios. Subsequently, we employ it as a fundamental element 
to design a proﬁcient algorithm for homomorphic covariance matrix 
computation, which harnesses the parallel computation capabilities of 
multiple matrix multiplication instances.
Privacy-preserving PCA using Homomorphic PowerMethod (Sec-
tion 6): PowerMethod consists of two main components: covariance 
matrix transformation and vector normalization. We ﬁrst design an eﬃ-
cient homomorphic circuit for covariance matrix transformation. Next, 
we employ an iterative algorithm approximating the inverse square root 
(InvSRT) function to perform the vector normalization and propose a 
systematic approach to parameterize the iterative algorithm. Finally, 
we present the process of performing privacy-preserving PCA utilizing 
our homomorphic PowerMethod circuit.
Implementation (Section 7) We compare our proposed solution with 
existing approaches, highlighting that our algorithm outperforms previ-
ous methods in terms of computational eﬃciency, precision, and scala-
bility.
2. Related work
2.1. Privacy-preserving PCA in cloud computing scenario
The initial attempts at performing PCA on an RLWE-based homo-
morphic encryption scheme are made by Lu et al. (2016) and Rathee 
et al. (2018). They propose using an iterative algorithm called Power-
Method to compute principal components in a homomorphic encryption 
setting. The PowerMethod iteratively computes 𝐯 ←Cov ⋅𝐯, and it can 
be proven that 𝐯converges to the dominant eigenvector of the covari-
ance matrix Cov after a ﬁnite number of steps, where the dominant 
eigenvector is equivalent to a principal component. However, they ﬁnd 
the homomorphic computation of the covariance matrix to be ineﬃ-
cient for arbitrary sample sizes. Therefore, their scheme requires the 
client (of cloud service) to compute and send the encryption of ∑𝐱𝑇
𝑖𝐱𝑖

--- Page 3 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
3
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Fig. 1. System architecture.
(where 𝐱𝑖represents the row vector form of the samples in the dataset 
𝑋), which not only causes the computational burden on the user but 
also becomes trivial because PowerMethod is no harder than comput-
ing ∑𝐱𝑇
𝑖𝐱𝑖in plaintext space. Furthermore, their PCA schemes cannot 
normalize the approximate eigenvector 𝐯during the iterations of Pow-
erMethod, and the length of the approximate eigenvector is prone to 
overﬂow since the homomorphic encryption they used only supports 
homomorphic operations on modular integers (Brakerski et al., 2014).
Subsequently, a work by Panda (Panda, 2021) migrates the Pow-
erMethod to another RLWE-based homomorphic encryption scheme 
known as CKKS that supports approximate computation on complex 
numbers (Cheon et al., 2017). The CKKS scheme enables them to per-
form vector normalization using an iterative algorithm of the inverse 
square-root function. However, their work provides only one possi-
ble implementation of the iterative algorithm without demonstrating 
how to choose its evaluation interval and the number of iterations. As 
a result, their solution lacks both accuracy and practicality. Further-
more, the PowerMethod in their work is done by iteratively computing 
𝐯 ←1∕𝑁⋅𝑋𝑇(𝑋𝐯) (where 𝑋is the centered dataset), rather than di-
rectly computing the covariance matrix transformation. This makes the 
complexity of the PowerMethod dependent on the size of the dataset 
rather than the size of the covariance matrix, which is ineﬃcient for 
datasets with a large number of samples.
2.2. Homomorphic encryption matrix multiplication
Numerous approaches are proposed on how to construct secure ma-
trix multiplication algorithms using homomorphic encryption schemes 
based on the RLWE problem (Duong et al., 2016), (Mishra et al., 2021), 
(Rathee et al., 2018), (Jiang et al., 2018), (Wang and Huang, 2019). 
Among them, the work by Jiang et al. (2018) introduces a scheme for 
secure real number matrix multiplication based on the CKKS scheme. 
To the best of our knowledge, it remains the state-of-the-art RLWE 
homomorphic encryption-based approach for real number matrix mul-
tiplication. In a recent study by Jang et al. (2022), they further improve 
this scheme by migrating it to a variant of CKKS based on the multivari-
ate polynomial learning with errors (m-RLWE) problem.
Nevertheless, few have systematically discussed the performance of 
homomorphic matrix multiplication within parallel computation sce-
narios. We believe that delving into this matter is of utmost importance, 
as parallel computation plays a pivotal role in expediting extensive ma-
trix operations that involve multiple ciphertexts. Eﬃciently executing 
multiple instances of homomorphic matrix multiplication in parallel 
is instrumental in accelerating large-scale computations, warranting a 
thorough exploration of this aspect.
3. Preliminaries
3.1. General notation
We use italic letters, such as 𝑎, to represent polynomial elements or 
numbers. We use bold letters, such as 𝐚, to represent vectors, and up-
percase letters, such as 𝐴, to represent matrices. The symbols ⊕and ⊙
denote elementwise addition and multiplication. The notation 𝜌(𝐚; 𝑘)
represents the result of cyclically left-shifting (or rotating) the com-
ponents of vector 𝐚by 𝑘positions. Additionally, we use (ℤ∕𝑞ℤ, +) to 
represent a modulo 𝑞additive group, where we use two sets of integers: 
(−𝑞∕2, 𝑞∕2] and [0, 𝑞−1] to refer to two diﬀerent representations of the 
residue class. We deﬁne [𝑎]𝑞as the result of reducing 𝑎modulo 𝑞that 
falls into (−𝑞∕2, 𝑞∕2], and 𝑎mod 𝑞as the result falling into [0, 𝑞−1].
3.2. System architecture
The system architecture for privacy-preserving PCA in the cloud 
computing context comprises two entities: the user and the cloud server 
engaged in a privacy-preserving protocol (see Fig. 1). The user aims to 
upload his or her private dataset to the untrusted cloud, leveraging its 
computational power for PCA and obtaining the computed result. Dur-
ing this procedure, the user encrypts the private dataset 𝑋using some 
encryption function 𝐸𝑛𝑐resulting in ciphertext 𝑐𝑡(𝑋) to prohibit the 
cloud from gaining any useful information related to user data. Then, 
after receiving 𝑐𝑡(𝑋), the cloud performs a privacy-preserving PCA tak-
ing 𝑐𝑡(𝑋) as input and outputting 𝑐𝑡(𝑉) as the ciphertext encrypting the 
expected PCA result. Finally, the user can decrypt 𝑐𝑡(𝑉) and recover the 
expected result by using the function 𝐷𝑒𝑐.
3.3. Threat model
We base our system architecture on a semi-honest security model. 
In speciﬁc terms, we consider the user’s dataset to be private, while 
the privacy-preserving PCA algorithm executed in the cloud is visible 
to both the user and the cloud, making it non-private. Thus, the cloud 
is assumed to be semi-honest from the perspective of the user. This 
implies that the cloud will not actively violate the established inter-
action rules and protocols, ensuring the correct execution of privacy-
preserving PCA. However, the cloud maintains a curiosity about the 
user’s private data, attempting to access the underlying plaintexts of 
the received ciphertexts.
3.4. Homomorphic encryption for arithmetic of approximate numbers
Homomorphic encryption is a cutting-edge ﬁeld in cryptography and 
serves as a powerful component for privacy-preserving computations.

--- Page 4 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
4
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
The CKKS scheme we mentioned earlier is a homomorphic encryption 
scheme supporting approximate arithmetic on complex vector space. It 
provides an encoding method to store up to 𝑁∕2 ﬂoating point val-
ues in plaintext or ciphertext, which are represented by polynomials in 
the domain 𝑅𝑄𝐿= ℤ𝑄𝐿[𝑋]∕(𝑋𝑁+ 1), where 𝑄𝐿= ∏𝐿
0 𝑞𝑖, and 𝑁is a 
power of 2. Operations over the domain are performed simultaneously 
on all encoded values, known as SIMD processing. The security of CKKS 
is based on the RLWE problem, so some noise is introduced into the en-
crypted values. We brieﬂy introduce the operations provided by CKKS 
in the following.
– 𝑠 ←SecKeyGen(⋅) generates the secret key 𝑠
– 𝑝𝑘, 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠 ←PubKeyGen(𝑠) generates public key 𝑝𝑘and a series of 
switching keys 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠 = {𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑗} where 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑗helps switch the 
secret inside a ciphertext from 𝑠𝑗to 𝑠𝑖. Notice that switching keys 
can be quite large in size. Typically, a group of switching keys 
together can occupy a space ranging from tens of megabytes to 
several gigabytes or even more.
– 𝑐𝑡(𝑚) ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝐿←Enc(𝑝𝑘, 𝑚) encryptes a plaintext vector 𝑝.
– 𝑚′ ←Dec(𝑠𝑘, 𝑐𝑡(𝑚)) decrypts the ciphertext 𝑐𝑡(𝑚) and output 𝑚′ ≈
𝑚
– 𝑐𝑡(𝑚1 + 𝑚2) ←Add(𝑐𝑡(𝑚1), 𝑐𝑡(𝑚2)) performs addition of the en-
crypted vectors.
– 𝑐𝑡(𝑚1 ⊙𝑚2) ←PMult(𝑐𝑡(𝑚1), 𝑚2) performs elementwise multipli-
cation between encrypted vector 𝑐𝑡(𝑚1) and plaintext vector 𝑚2. 
Rescaling is needed to control the noise growth in the result.
– 𝑐𝑡(𝑚1 ⊙𝑚2) ←Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑚1), 𝑐𝑡(𝑚2)) performs elementwise multipli-
cation between encrypted vectors. Rescaling and relinearization 
operations are required to control the size and noise growth of the 
result.
– 𝑐𝑡(𝜌(𝑚, 𝑘)) ←Rot(𝑐𝑡(𝑚), 𝑟𝑡𝑘𝑘) performs cyclic rotation of step 𝑘on 
the encrypted vector, where 𝑟𝑡𝑘𝑘is an instance of switching key 
𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠5𝑘,𝑠and 𝑠is the secret inside the encrypted vector.
Notably, for a given set of modulus products 𝑄𝐿, the homomorphic 
operations are limited to a multiplication depth of at most 𝐿because 
rescaling consumes the modulus level of ciphertexts (any ciphertext in 
𝑅2
𝑄𝑙is at the 𝑙-th modulus level, and rescaling brings the ciphertext to 
a lower level 𝑅2
𝑄𝑙−1). Once the modulus level of a ciphertext reaches 0, 
it can no longer participate in homomorphic multiplication operations. 
To perform operations with a greater multiplication depth, we need to 
conduct an operation called modulus refresh which raises the modulus 
level of the ciphertext. The modulus refresh can be achieved either by 
decrypting and re-encrypting the ciphertexts or by applying the boot-
strapping function to the ciphertexts.
We build our privacy-preserving PCA scheme upon a full Residue 
Number System (RNS) variant of the CKKS scheme (Cheon et al., 2019) 
implemented in the Lattigo library (Lattigo, 2022). This variant allows 
eﬃcient polynomial multiplication by representing polynomials in both 
the RNS and NTT (Number Theoretic Transform) domains. We refer to 
Appendix A for more details of the full-RNS CKKS scheme.
3.5. Homomorphic matrix operation
Our optimization for the homomorphic matrix multiplication is de-
rived from the scheme proposed by Jiang et al. (2018) for the CKKS 
scheme. They utilize a homomorphic linear transformation technique 
to build up the homomorphic matrix multiplication. We will introduce 
both of these techniques in the following.
3.5.1. Homomorphic linear transformation
Halevi et al. ﬁrst propose an approach to achieve linear transfor-
mations in the context of homomorphic encryption (Halevi and Shoup, 
2014). They pointed out that any linear transformation 𝑈𝐦can be rep-
resented as:
𝑈⋅𝐦=
∑
0≤𝓁<𝑛
(𝐮𝓁⊙𝜌(𝐦;𝓁)),
(1)
where 𝐮𝓁represents the 𝓁-th diagonal vector of 𝑈: 𝐮𝓁= (𝑈0,𝓁, 𝑈1,𝓁+1, ...,
𝑈𝑛−1,(𝓁+𝑛−1) mod 𝑛). By associating 𝐦with the ciphertext and 𝑈with 
the plaintext matrix in (1), we can eﬀectuate a homomorphic linear 
transformation 𝑈𝐦through 𝑛ciphertext rotations, 𝑛plaintext multi-
plication, and 𝑛 −1 ciphertext additions. An algorithm known as Baby 
Step Giant Step (BSGS) can be employed to minimize the number of ro-
tation operations involved (Halevi and Shoup, 2018): if there exists an 
arithmetic progression {𝑠𝑘= 𝑎 ⋅𝑘| −𝑑< 𝑘 < 𝑑, 𝑑= 𝑑1𝑑2} such that all 
indices 𝓁corresponding to non-zero diagonal vectors in 𝑈belong to 
this arithmetic progression, then Equation (1) can be reformulated as 
follows:
𝑈𝐦=
∑
−𝑑2<𝑖<𝑑2,0≤𝑗<𝑑1
(
𝐮𝑎⋅(𝑑1⋅𝑖+𝑗) ⊙𝜌(𝐦;𝑎⋅(𝑑1 ⋅𝑖+ 𝑗))
)
=
∑
−𝑑2<𝑖<𝑑2
𝜌
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑑1
(
𝜌(𝐮𝑎⋅(𝑑1⋅𝑖+𝑗);−𝑎⋅𝑑1 ⋅𝑖) ⊙𝜌(𝐦;𝑎⋅𝑗)
)
;𝑎⋅𝑑1 ⋅𝑖
)
.
(2)
Further optimization can be achieved by analyzing the rotation 
operations. Halevi et al. introduce a ciphertext rotation optimization 
technique called hoisting which reconstructs the internal operations for 
rotating a ciphertext 𝑐= (𝑐0, 𝑐1) ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝑙by 𝑘steps in the following se-
quence. (i) Decompose: Decompose 𝑐1 into a vector 𝐜based on the 
decomposition base 𝐛of the rotation key 𝑟𝑡𝑘𝑘. (ii)Permute: Perform 
automorphism 𝜙𝑘∶𝑋→𝑋5𝑘( mod 𝑋𝑁+ 1) on each component of 𝐜. 
(iii)MultSum: Perform the inner product (𝑐′
0, 𝑐′
1) ←⟨𝐜,rtk𝑘⟩, resulting 
in a hoisted ciphertext in 𝑅2
𝑄𝑙𝑃. (iv) ModDown: Reduce the modulus of 
the hoisted ciphertext to bring it back to 𝑅2
𝑄𝑙. Here, Decompose and
ModDown involve NTT and CRT basis extensions, which dominate the 
computational complexity of the rotation operation. The rotation key is 
only involved in the MultSum. Therefore, multiple rotations performed 
on the same ciphertext can share the result of Decompose(ct) when all 
the corresponding rotation keys are available.
Bossuat et al. apply the hoisting idea to the BSGS-optimized lin-
ear transformation algorithm (Bossuat et al., 2021). They apply the 
hoisting technique to the rotations 𝜌(𝐦; 𝑎 ⋅𝑗), 0 ≤𝑗≤𝑑1 in Equation 
(2) but do not perform the ﬁnal step of the rotation, ModDown, im-
mediately. Instead, they multiply the intermediate hoisted ciphertexts 
with the corresponding pre-rotated diagonal vectors 𝜌(𝐮𝑎⋅(𝑑1⋅𝑖+𝑗); −𝑎 ⋅
𝑑1 ⋅𝑖) and aggregate the products in 𝑅2
𝑃𝑄𝓁. ModDown is ﬁnally 
applied to the aggregated result. This optimization method is re-
ferred to as the double-hoisting technique. It reduces the computa-
tional complexity of the BSGS-optimized linear transformation from 
(𝑑2 + 𝑑1) ⋅(MultSum + ModDown + Decompose + Permute) to (𝑑2 +
𝑑1) ⋅(MultSum + Permute) + (𝑑2 + 1) ⋅(Decompose + ModDown).
In the subsequent discussion, we assume that all the rotation keys 
required for performing any homomorphic encryption linear transfor-
mation are loaded into memory prior to the computation. This is the 
current implementation strategy in the Lattigo library. Although it is 
theoretically possible to load a key into memory only when it is needed 
for computation and release it soon afterward to control a smaller mem-
ory footprint for keys, we do not recommend this practice. Because it 
may incur additional time for disk read/write operations and disrupt 
the compactness of the storage structure. Especially, it will signiﬁcantly 
slow down the speed of consecutive linear transformation computation.
3.5.2. Homomorphic matrix multiplication by Jiang et al.
Jiang et al. proposed a homomorphic matrix multiplication ap-
proach based on the aforementioned linear transformation algorithm 
and its BSGS optimization (Jiang et al., 2018). A square matrix 𝐴of 
size 𝑛 × 𝑛can be encoded as a vector 𝐚with 𝑛2 components using the 
row ordering encoding. Considering the multiplication of matrices 𝐴

--- Page 5 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
5
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
and 𝐵, Jiang et al. ﬁrst encode 𝐴, 𝐵into vectors 𝐚𝐛with row ordering, 
then compute the following equation:
𝐜=
𝑛−1
∑
𝑘=0
(𝐶𝑘𝑍𝐚) ⊙(𝑅𝑘𝑇𝐛),
(3)
where 𝐶, 𝑍, 𝑅, and 𝑇are speciﬁc permutation matrices, and the 𝐜is 
the encoding vector of the matrix 𝐴𝐵. They also design another per-
mutation matrix transformation 𝐺for matrix transposition: 𝐚′ = 𝐺𝐚, 
such that 𝐚′ represents the transpose 𝐴𝑇of the matrix 𝐴represented 
by 𝐚. The BSGS algorithm is employed for the transformations 𝑍, 𝑇and 
𝐺to greatly enhance eﬃciency. However, Jiang et al. treat BSGS as a 
black-box operation without considering internal optimization by hoist-
ing techniques.
3.6. Principal component analysis using PowerMethod
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is frequently employed for the 
dimensionality reduction of a dataset. Its fundamental concept involves 
identifying orthogonal axes that maximize the variance of the dataset 
projected onto these axes, which are referred to as principal compo-
nents. Finding the top 𝑘principal components is equivalent to determin-
ing the 𝑘largest eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of the dataset.
The covariance matrix Σ of the dataset 𝑋is given by Σ = 1
𝑁𝑋𝑇𝑋−
𝜇𝜇𝑇, where 𝑢𝑇=
1
𝑁
∑𝑁−1
𝑖=0 𝐱𝑇
𝑖. The PowerMethod is an approximate 
algorithm for computing the dominant eigenvector of the covariance 
matrix (see Algorithm 1). It accepts a covariance matrix and its initial 
approximation of the dominant eigenvector and continuously applies 
the covariance matrix transformation to the approximate eigenvector 
to make it more and more accurate. The overﬂow should be prevented 
by normalizing the approximate vector after each matrix transforma-
tion. The EigenShift algorithm is used to shift the covariance matrix in 
terms of eigenvectors (see Algorithm 2). It takes the covariance matrix 
and the top 𝑘eigenvectors as inputs and outputs the 𝑘-shifted covari-
ance matrix, where the (𝑘 + 1)-th dominant eigenvector of the original 
covariance matrix becomes the 1-th dominant eigenvector of the shifted 
one. By combining the PowerMethod and the EigenShift, we can com-
pute the top principal components of the dataset.
Algorithm 1 PowerMethod.
Input: Σ: covariance matrix of the dataset; 𝑙𝑃: number of iterations.
Output: 𝐮1, 𝜆1: dominant eigen-vector of Σ and its eigen-value
1: Choose a random vector 𝐯(0) of size 𝑑
2: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑙𝑃do
3:
𝐯(𝑖) ←Σ𝐯(𝑖−1)
4:
𝐯(𝑖) ←𝐯(𝑖)∕||𝐯(𝑖)||
5: end for
6: return 𝐮1 = 𝐯(𝑙𝑃) and 𝜆1 = ||𝐯(𝑙𝑃)||∕||𝐯(𝑙𝑃−1)||
Algorithm 2 EigenShift.
Input: Σ: covariance matrix of the dataset; {𝐮𝑖, 𝜆𝑖}: the 𝑖-th dominant eigenvector of Σ
and its eigenvalue.
Output: Σ𝑘: 𝑘-shifted covariance matrix of 𝑋
1: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑘 −1 do
2:
Σ𝑖+1 = Σ𝑖−𝜆𝑖𝐮𝑖𝐮𝑇
𝑖
3: end for
4: return Σ𝑘
3.7. Iterative algorithm of inverse square root function
The inverse square-root (InvSRT) function is used to perform vector 
normalization in the PowerMethod algorithm. One feasible approach to 
evaluate InvSRT homomorphically is to use iterative algorithms such as 
Newton’s Method (see Algorithm 3). These methods take the point 𝑥
for evaluation and an appropriate initial approximation of 1
√
𝑥as input 
and output a more accurate result after a ﬁnite number of iterations. We 
will use the term iterative InvSRT algorithm to refer to these methods in 
subsequent discussions. Providing a closer initial approximation for the 
iterative InvSRT algorithm can result in better convergence speed. Prior 
researches propose employing piecewise functions, Taylor expansions, 
and rational polynomials as functions to compute the initial approxima-
tion of the iterative InvSRT (Panda, 2022), (Qu and Xu, 2022).
Algorithm 3 Newton’s method.
Input: 𝑥0: target evaluation point of inverse square-root function; 𝑦0: initial approxima-
tion of 
1
√𝑥0
Output: 𝑦𝑑: more precise approximation of 1
√𝑥0
1: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑑do
2:
𝑦𝑖←1
2 𝑦𝑖−1(3 −𝑥0𝑦2
𝑖−1)
3: end for
4: return 𝑦𝑑
4. Optimized homomorphic matrix multiplication
In this section, we improve the homomorphic matrix multiplication 
proposed by Jinag et al. to better serve our covariance matrix computa-
tion. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst optimize the matrix multiplication with hoist-
ing techniques to reduce its computation complexity (Section 4.1.1). 
Then, we analyze the space complexity of the hoisting-optimized ma-
trix multiplication in parallel computation scenarios, during which we 
observe a problem that the large number of rotation keys required may 
occupy the memory and limit the performance of parallel computation 
(Section 4.1.2). To address this problem, we introduce techniques to 
reduce these rotation keys (Section 4.2). In the ﬁnal subsection, we 
discuss the security of the proposed optimizations on homomorphic 
computations, aﬃrming that they do not compromise the security of 
the underlying encryption scheme.
4.1. Homomorphic matrix multiplication equipped with hoisting techniques
4.1.1. Applying hoisting techniques to linear transformation components
The hoisting techniques can be applied to the following lin-
ear transformations involved in the 𝑛 × 𝑛matrix multiplication: 
𝑍, 𝑇, {𝐶𝑘, 𝑅𝑘|1 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛} (recall Equation (3)). We initially focus on 
𝑍and 𝑇. 𝑍comprises 2𝑛 −1 non-zero diagonal vectors with indices 
ranging from −𝑛 + 1 to 𝑛 −1. On the other hand, 𝑇consists of only 
𝑛non-zero diagonal vectors, with indices 𝑘 ⋅𝑛for 0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛. Both 𝑍
and 𝑇exhibit a well-behaved arithmetic progression in the indices of 
their non-zero diagonal vectors. This property enables the BSGS algo-
rithm to reduce the number of rotations from 𝑂(𝑛) to 𝑂(𝑛1 + 𝑛2), where 
𝑛1, 𝑛2 denotes the inner and outer loop count. The double-hoisting tech-
nique can be naturally applied to the BSGS version of 𝑍and 𝑇, further 
reducing their rotation complexity.
The transformation 𝐶𝑘has only two non-zero diagonal vectors: 𝑘
and 𝑘 −𝑛, while 𝑅𝑘has only one non-zero diagonal vector: 𝑛 ⋅𝑘, for 
1 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛. There is no need to apply BSGS optimization on these trans-
formations due to the scarcity of their non-zero diagonals. Nonetheless, 
we can still enhance their eﬃciency using the hoisting technique. We 
observe that the rotation steps in the inner loop of 𝑍form a sub-
sequence of the non-zero diagonal indices in the transformation set 
{𝐶𝑘|0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛}. Similarly, rotation steps used for the inner loop of 𝑇
form a subsequence of the non-zero diagonal indices in the set {𝑅𝑘|0 ≤
𝑘 < 𝑛}. This observation implies that the rotation keys of the double-
hoisting 𝑍and 𝑇are basically suﬃcient to perform the transformations 
{𝐶𝑘, 𝑅𝑘|0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛} with the hoisting technique (column shifting trans-
formations require an extra rotation step −𝑛to perform rotations of 
steps 𝑘 −𝑛, 𝑘 = 1, 2, … , 𝑛 −1). In particular, we can achieve further 
optimization by emulating the strategy used in the double-hoisting 
technique for the transformations 𝐶𝑘. Deferring the ﬁnal ModDown
operations in the rotations associated with the two non-zero diagonal

--- Page 6 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
6
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Table 1
Rotation Complexity and Minimal Rotation Keys requirement Comparison between BSGS and dh-
BSGS scheme for Z, T linTrans. 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 denote the inner loop count and the outer loop count in 
the BSGS algorithm. The complexity of the linear transformations is indicated by the ciphertext rota-
tions performed. More speciﬁcally, these rotations are decomposed into their four internal operations:
MultSum(𝑀𝑆), Permute(𝑃𝑚), Decompose(𝐷𝑝), and ModDown(𝑀𝐷).
Scheme
LinTrans
MinRotKeys
Complexity (Rotations)
Origin
𝑍
2𝑛2 + 1
(𝑛1 + 2𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚+ 𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Optimized
𝑍
𝑛1 + 2𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 2𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+ (2𝑛2 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Origin
𝑇
𝑛2 + 1
(𝑛1 + 𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚+ 𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Optimized
𝑇
𝑛1 + 𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+ (𝑛2 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Origin
{𝐶𝑘|0 ≤𝑘< 𝑛}
2
(2𝑛−1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚+ 𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Optimized
{𝐶𝑘|0 ≤𝑘< 𝑛}
𝑛𝑍1 + 1
(2𝑛−1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+(2𝑛∕𝑛𝑍1 + 2) ⋅𝐷𝑝+ (2𝑛∕𝑛𝑍1 + 𝑛)𝑀𝐷
Origin
{𝑅𝑘|0 ≤𝑘< 𝑛}
1
(𝑛−1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚+ 𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Optimized
{𝑅𝑘|0 ≤𝑘< 𝑛}
𝑛𝑇1
(𝑛−1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚) +(𝑛∕𝑛𝑇1 + 1) ⋅𝐷𝑝+ (𝑛−1) ⋅𝑀𝐷
vectors, we multiply the two hoisted ciphertexts with the corresponding 
plaintext diagonal vectors in 𝑅𝑄𝑙𝑃and aggregate the results. ModDown
is then applied to the aggregated value.
We compared the ciphertext rotation complexity of various linear 
transformations in homomorphic matrix multiplication before and after 
applying the aforementioned hoisting technique (see Table 1). We can 
observe that the number of operations Decompose and ModDown is 
signiﬁcantly decreased by the hoisting techniques. However, the min-
imal number of rotation keys required is increased by the inner loop 
counts of 𝑍and 𝑇. The increment of the rotation keys may cause 
memory limitation in a scenario where multiple matrix multiplication 
instances are desired to run in parallel. We will discuss this problem in 
the next subsection.
4.1.2. Parallelizability and space complexity analysis
The matrix multiplication proposed by Jiang et al. exhibits paral-
lelizability. Considering Equation (3), we can perform transformation 
sets {𝐶𝑘𝑍𝐚|0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛} and {𝑅𝑘𝑇𝐛|0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛} in parallel with two 
threads. This idea can be extended to a one-to-many scenario where ma-
trix 𝑋is multiplied with multiple matrices {𝑌𝑖|𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑑}. We can 
precompute and store {𝐶𝑘𝑍𝐱|𝑘 = 0, … , 𝑛} (or {𝑅𝑘𝑇𝐱|𝑘 = 0, … , 𝑛}), 
and perform the remaining steps of Equation (3) in parallel for each 
𝑌𝑖with 𝑑threads. This approach saves the time required for 𝑑−1 com-
putations of {𝐶𝑘𝑍𝐱} (or {𝑅𝑘𝑇𝐱}). We can further consider multiple 
parallel one-to-many computations, which can save more time when 
{𝑌𝑖|𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑑} also need to be repeatedly involved in calculations 
with a set of {𝑋𝑖|𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑑}.
However, we concern that suﬃcient space for the aforementioned 
parallel computation of matrix multiplication cannot be easily obtained. 
The space complexity of matrix multiplication is determined by the 
rotation key space of 𝑍and 𝑇, as well as the intermediate cipher-
texts cached by all parallel instances of transformations. On one hand, 
the total number of rotation keys required in matrix multiplication is 
𝑛𝑍1 + 2𝑛𝑍2 + 𝑛𝑇1 + 𝑛𝑇2 −3. On the other hand, the number of interme-
diate ciphertexts that need to be cached increases with the number of 
parallel instances of matrix multiplication. For example, 𝑑instances of 
matrix multiplication collectively require caching 𝑛regular ciphertexts 
and 𝑑⋅𝑛𝑇1 (or 𝑑⋅𝑛𝑍1) hoisted ciphertexts under the one-to-many sce-
nario. The scalability of increasing parallel instances might be hindered 
by the large space requirement for rotation keys.
4.2. Rotation key reduction for homomorphic matrix multiplication
We aim to minimize the number of rotation keys for homomor-
phic matrix multiplication, thereby freeing up space for the parallel 
computation of more instances. We introduce two types of rotation 
key reduction techniques in the following subsection. The ﬁrst tech-
nique is a simple key substitution method. For an arithmetic sequence 
of rotations applied on a ciphertext, the simple key substitution con-
structs this sequence of rotation by repeatedly performing rotation with 
one of its subsequences, resulting in a reduction in the number of re-
quired rotation keys. However, this approach compromises the beneﬁts 
brought by the hoisting technique, leading to a decrease in the overall 
speed of matrix multiplication. The second technique involves apply-
ing a decomposition called diagonal convergence decomposition to the 
transformations 𝑍and 𝑇. The number of non-zero diagonal vectors in 
the decomposed transformations is signiﬁcantly reduced, resulting in a 
notable reduction in the number of keys while preserving the integrity 
of hoisting.
4.2.1. Simple key substitution method
Recall that we only utilize the rotation keys from the inner loop of 
transformation 𝑇to perform all ciphertext rotations of the row transfor-
mations (see Section 4.1.1). This approach is an instance of the simple 
key substitution method which can be described as follows: when ap-
plying a sequence of rotations to a ciphertext, if the rotation steps form 
an arithmetic progression starting from 0, then any subsequence start-
ing from 0 of that arithmetic progression can be used to perform the 
rotations. However, using shorter subsequence results in fewer beneﬁts 
from the hoisting technique, as the hoisting technique cannot be fully 
deployed across the entire sequence but only within individual subse-
quences. Employing this method to reduce the rotation keys required 
for the inner loop of 𝑍(or 𝑇) from 𝑛1 to 𝑛′
1 leads to an additional cost 
of 𝑛1∕𝑛′
1 Decompose and ModDown operations and a subsequent eﬀect 
on the row (or column) transformations. Moreover, the simple key sub-
stitution method has marginal eﬀectiveness when the inner loop count 
of the linear transformation is relatively small. This is because fewer it-
erations in the inner loop imply an increase in the number of outer loop 
iterations and the corresponding required keys.
4.2.2. Decomposition of diagonal vector convergence for speciﬁc 
permutation matrix
We present the second method for reducing the required rotation 
keys in matrix multiplication to overcome the limitations of the sim-
ple key substitution. Recall that the number of rotation keys required to 
perform a homomorphic linear transformation is essentially determined 
by the number of non-zero diagonal vectors in that linear transforma-
tion. This implies that if we can decompose 𝑍and 𝑇into transforma-
tion with fewer non-zero diagonal vectors, we can reduce the number of 
rotation keys. Henceforth, we ﬁrst establish a concept called diagonal 
convergence decomposition in Deﬁnition 1 to describe a decomposition 
method that reduces the number of non-zero diagonal vectors in lin-
ear transformations. This decomposition represents the original matrix 
as a sum and product of several matrices, such that the combined set 
of these decomposed matrices has fewer distinct non-zero diagonal in-
dices compared to the original matrix. To better focus on the diagonals, 
we also deﬁne the diagonal coordinate of a matrix unit and the rules 
converting it back to the normal coordinate that locates units using the 
row and column index in Deﬁnitions 2, 3.
Constructing a diagonal convergence decomposition method that ap-
plies to all matrices might not be a straightforward task. Therefore, we 
will speciﬁcally focus on designing the diagonal convergence decom-
position for 𝑍and 𝑇. Both 𝑍and 𝑇are permutation matrices, which

--- Page 7 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
7
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
are Boolean matrices with the properties that each row and each col-
umn contain exactly one 1 value. We observe that when decomposing a 
Boolean matrix 𝐴of size 𝑛 × 𝑛into a product of two Boolean matrices 
𝐴2𝐴1, for any non-zero diagonal 𝑘in 𝐴and its 𝑖-th element 𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑖), if 
𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑖) is 1, there always exist a diagonal 𝑘1 in 𝐴1 and a diagonal 𝑘2 in 
𝐴2 such that the elements in the 𝑘1-th diagonal of 𝐴1 are 1 in the same 
column as 𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑖), the elements in the 𝑘2-th diagonal of 𝐴2 are 1 in the 
same row as 𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑖), and 𝑘 = 𝑘1 + 𝑘2 mod 𝑛(see Theorem 1). In Deﬁ-
nition 4, we utilize Theorem 1 to construct a method for decomposing 
a single diagonal in 𝐴into diagonals in 𝐴1 and 𝐴2.
Deﬁnition 1. We refer to a matrix decomposition as a diagonal con-
vergence decomposition when it expresses a square matrix as a prod-
uct and sum of a series of matrices, and the total number of distinct 
diagonal vector indices in these matrices is smaller than the number of 
distinct diagonal vector indices in the original matrix.
Deﬁnition 2. For any 𝑛 × 𝑛square matrix, we represent its column in-
dices, row indices, and diagonal vector indices using the additive group 
(ℤ∕𝑛ℤ, +), where the indices of the diagonal vectors are deﬁned based 
on the column indices of the elements in the ﬁrst row of the matrix.
Deﬁnition 3. For an 𝑛 × 𝑛square matrix, the element located at row 
𝑖and column 𝑗possesses a normal coordinate 𝑁(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈(ℤ∕𝑛ℤ)2, and a 
diagonal coordinate 𝐷(𝑘, 𝑙) ∈(ℤ∕𝑛ℤ)2. Thus, there exists a mapping 𝑓∶
(ℤ∕𝑛ℤ)2 →(ℤ∕𝑛ℤ)2 that transforms a normal coordinate to a diagonal 
coordinate:
𝑓(𝑁(𝑖,𝑗)) = 𝐷(𝑗−𝑖,𝑖),
𝑓−1(𝐷(𝑘,𝑙)) = 𝑁(𝑙,𝑘+ 𝑙).
(4)
We denote the symbol 𝐴𝑁(𝑖,𝑗) to represent the element of 𝐴located at 
the normal coordinate 𝑁(𝑖, 𝑗), and 𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑙) to represent the element of 𝐴
located at the diagonal coordinate 𝐷(𝑘, 𝑙).
Theorem 1. Let 𝐴be a boolean matrix that can be decomposed into 𝐴 =
𝐴2𝐴1, where 𝐴1 and 𝐴2 are both boolean matrices. For any 1 element 
𝐴𝑁(𝑖,𝑗) in 𝐴, there exists a unique index 0 ≤𝑎 < 𝑛in 𝐴1 and 𝐴2 such 
that 𝐴1𝑁(𝑎,𝑗) and 𝐴2𝑁(𝑖,𝑎) are both 1. Furthermore, considering 𝐷(𝑘, 𝑖) =
𝑓(𝑁(𝑖, 𝑗)), 𝐷(𝑘1, 𝑎) = 𝑓(𝑁(𝑎, 𝑗)), and 𝐷(𝑘2, 𝑖) = 𝑓(𝑁(𝑖, 𝑎)), we have 𝑘1 +
𝑘2 = 𝑘.
Proof. Given 𝐴 = 𝐴2𝐴1, we have 𝐴𝑁(𝑖,𝑗) = ∑𝑛−1
𝑎=0 𝐴1𝑁(𝑎,𝑗) ⋅𝐴2𝑁(𝑖,𝑎). 
Since 𝐴1 and 𝐴2 are Boolean matrices, the equation 𝐴𝑁(𝑖,𝑗) = 1 holds 
only when there exists a unique pair (𝐴1𝑁(𝑎,𝑗), 𝐴2𝑁(𝑖,𝑎)) that equals 
(1, 1). According to Deﬁnition 3, we have 𝑘1 + 𝑘2 = (𝑗−𝑎) + (𝑎 −𝑖) =
𝑘.
□
Deﬁnition 4. For a boolean matrix 𝐴, 𝐴1, and 𝐴2 of size 𝑛 × 𝑛, de-
composing the 𝑘th diagonal of 𝐴onto the 𝑘1th diagonal of the right 
matrix 𝐴1, and the 𝑘2th diagonal of the left matrix 𝐴2 refers to the 
following process: For each 1 element 𝐴𝐷(𝑘,𝑙) in the 𝑘th diagonal, set 
𝐴1𝐷(𝑘1,𝑘+𝑙−𝑘1 mod 𝑛) to 1, which corresponds to the element on the 𝑘1th 
diagonal with the same column index as 𝑘. Also, set 𝐴2𝐷(𝑘2,𝑙) to 1, which 
corresponds to the element on the 𝑘2th diagonal with the same row in-
dex as 𝑘. Here, 𝑘1 + 𝑘2 = 𝑘.
Before we proceed with the diagonal convergence decomposition 
of matrices 𝑍and 𝑇, let us establish some common ground. Let us 
assume that the discussions henceforth are based on the 𝑛 × 𝑛matrix 
multiplication scenario, meaning matrices 𝑍and 𝑇are always of size 
𝑛2 × 𝑛2. Moreover, we deﬁne that if the maximum non-zero diagonal 
index of a matrix is 𝑛′ ≤0, it is equivalent to stating that all non-zero 
diagonal vectors of the resulting matrices belong to the set [−𝑛′, 𝑛′] ∩ℤ.
Decomposition of linear transformation 𝑍
The value of the 𝓁-th com-
ponent in the 𝑘-th non-zero diagonal vector 𝐳𝑘[𝓁] can be expressed as 
(all operations below involving non-zero diagonal vector indices are as-
sumed to be in the residual class (−𝑛2∕2, 𝑛2∕2] of (ℤ∕𝑛2ℤ, +)):
𝐳𝑘[𝓁] =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1,
if 𝑘≥0 and 0 ≤𝓁−𝑛⋅𝑘< (𝑛−𝑘);
1,
if 𝑘< 0 and −𝑘≤𝓁−(𝑛+ 𝑘) ⋅𝑛< 𝑛;
0,
otherwise.
(5)
We observe that the 1 values of 𝑍are symmetrically distributed on both 
sides of the 0th diagonal vector. They can be divided into 𝑛submatri-
ces of size 𝑛 × 𝑛, each having the 0th diagonal vector of 𝑍as its own 
0th diagonal vector. These submatrices do not overlap with each other. 
Each submatrix contains 𝑛elements with a value of 1. If we denote 𝑆𝑖, 
0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑛, as the 𝑛submatrices of diagonals of 𝑍, then the 1 values in 
𝑆𝑖always ﬁll the diagonals 𝑖and 𝑖 −𝑛. Considering these characteristic, 
we design the diagonal convergence decomposition of 𝑍as follows:
1. Set the expected maximum non-zero diagonal index as 𝑛′. Divide 
𝑍into the format 𝑍= 𝑍1 + 𝑍2, where 𝑍1 is the matrix containing 
all non-zero diagonal vectors of 𝑍with an index no smaller than 0 
and 𝑍2 contains the rest of the non-zero diagonal vectors. This step 
ensures that each submatrix of 𝑍1 and 𝑍2 has at most one non-zero 
diagonal vector, and each unit with value 1 belongs to a submatrix.
2. For both 𝑍1 and 𝑍2, perform the following decomposition (assum-
ing 𝑍1 or 𝑍2 is denoted as 𝑍′):
(a) For each non-zero diagonal with index 𝑘in 𝑍′, If the absolute 
value of the index is greater than 𝑛′, decompose it onto the 
𝑘 −sign(𝑘) ⋅𝑛′ diagonal of the left matrix 𝑍′
𝑙and the sign(𝑘) ⋅𝑛′
diagonal of the right matrix 𝑍′
𝑟. If the absolute value of the 
index is no bigger than 𝑛′, decompose it onto the 𝑛′ diagonal 
of the 𝑍′
𝑙and the 0 diagonal of the 𝑍′
𝑟.
(b) After iterating over all non-zero diagonals, if 𝑍′
𝑙still contains 
non-zero diagonals greater than 𝑛′, replace 𝑍′ with 𝑍′
𝑙and re-
peat the decomposition. If no such diagonals exist, return the 
product of 𝑍′
𝑙and all the right matrices obtained from the de-
composition as the ﬁnal decomposition result of 𝑍′.
Finally, we are able to decompose both 𝑍1 and 𝑍2 into the product 
of ⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉matrix, respectively, as follows:
𝑍=
⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
∏
𝑖=1
𝑍1𝑖+
⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
∏
𝑖=1
𝑍2𝑖.
(6)
The decomposed expressions of both products have the same charac-
teristic: only the leftmost matrix has non-zero diagonal vectors with 
indices in the interval [−𝑛′ + 1, 𝑛′ −1] ∩ℤ, while the remaining ma-
trices have only non-zero diagonal vectors with indices −𝑛′, 0 (or 𝑛′, 0). 
Therefore, the dominant complexity lies in the two leftmost linear trans-
formations of the two matrix products. These two linear transformations 
still possess the same arithmetic progression property as 𝑍, thus making 
them suitable for beneﬁting from the double-hoisting BSGS algorithm.
Decomposition of linear transformation 𝑇
Transformation 𝑇consists of 
𝑛non-zero diagonal vectors, whose indices are {𝑘 ⋅𝑛|0 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛}. For 
the 𝑘 ⋅𝑛-th non-zero diagonal vector 𝐭𝑘𝑛of 𝑇, the value of its 𝓁-th 
component 𝐭𝑘𝑛[𝓁] can be expressed as (all operations below involving 
diagonal vector indices are assumed to be in the residual class [0, 𝑛2 −1]
of (ℤ∕𝑛2ℤ, +))):
𝐭𝑘𝑛[𝓁] =
{
1,
if 𝓁∈{𝑘+ 𝑛⋅𝑖|0 ≤𝑖< 𝑛} ;
0,
otherwise.
(7)
Although the units with a value of 1 in 𝑇can not be divided into sub-
matrices like 𝑍, the non-zero diagonals of 𝑇have a consistent spacing 
between the units with a value of 1. Speciﬁcally, we observe that the 
row indices of units with a value of 1 in the same non-zero diagonal

--- Page 8 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
8
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Table 2
Rotation Complexity and Minimal Rtks Number Comparison of LinTrans 𝑍, 𝑇among original double-hoisting 
BSGS(dh-BSGS), dh-BSGS with Simple Key Substitution (SmpKeySub) and dh-BSGS with Diagonal Vector Conver-
gence Decomposition (DCDmp). MaxDiagNo. denotes the maximum non-zero diagonal index in the lineartrans-
formation(s), and MinRotKeys indicates the minimum number of keys required to perform the lineartransfor-
mation(s).
Scheme
LT
MaxDiagNo.
MinRotKeys
Complexity (Rotations)
dh-BSGS
𝑍
𝑛−1
𝑛1 + 2𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 2𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+ (2𝑛2 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
SmpKeySub
𝑍
𝑛−1
𝑛′
1 + 2𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 2𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+ (2𝑛2 + 𝑛1∕𝑛′
1 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
DCDmp
𝑍
𝑛′ = 𝑛1 ⋅𝑛′
2
𝑛1 + 2𝑛′
2 −1
2(𝑛1 + 𝑛′
2 + 𝑛∕𝑛′ −1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚) + 2(𝑛′
2 + 𝑛∕𝑛′) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
dh-BSGS
𝑇
(𝑛−1) ⋅𝑛
𝑛1 + 𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+(𝑛2 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
SmpKeySub
𝑇
(𝑛−1) ⋅𝑛
𝑛′
1 + 𝑛2 −2
(𝑛1 + 𝑛2) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚)+(𝑛2 + 𝑛1∕𝑛′
1 + 1) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
DCDmp
𝑇
𝑛′ ⋅𝑛= 𝑛1 ⋅𝑛′
2 ⋅𝑛
𝑛1 + 𝑛′
2 −1
(𝑛1 + 𝑛′
2 + 𝑛∕𝑛′ −1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚) + (𝑛′
2 + 𝑛∕𝑛′) ⋅(𝐷𝑝+ 𝑀𝐷)
Algorithm 4 Diagonal Convergence Decompose for LinTrans Z (DCD-
forZ).
Input:
𝑛: dimension parameter to create a 𝑍with size 𝑛2 × 𝑛2;
𝑛′: the target maximum non-zero diagonal index.
Output: {𝑍1𝑖, 𝑍2𝑖|𝑍= ∏⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
𝑖=1
𝑍𝑖}: decomposed matrices.
1: Assume all indices of diagonal vectors are in residual class (−𝑛2∕2, 𝑛2∕2].
2: Set 𝑍1 as the matrix containing all non-zero diagonal vectors of 𝑍with an index no 
smaller than 0, and set 𝑍2 as the matrix containing the rest of the non-zero diagonal 
vectors of 𝑍.
3: for t=1,2 do
4:
for 𝑖 = 1 to ⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉ −1 do
5:
Initialize matrices 𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡, 𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡
as zero matrices.
6:
for each non-zero diagonal vector with index |𝑘| ≥𝑛′ in 𝑍𝑡do
7:
Decompose the vector to the 𝑛′-th non-zero diagonal vector of the right ma-
trix 𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡
and the (𝑘 −sign(𝑘) ⋅𝑛′)-th diagonal of the left matrix 𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡.
8:
end for
9:
for each non-zero diagonal vector 𝑘 < 𝑛′ in 𝑍𝑡do
10:
Decompose the vector to the 0-th non-zero diagonal vector of the right matrix 
𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡
and the 𝑘-th diagonal of the left matrix 𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡.
11:
end for
12:
(At this point, 𝑍𝑡= 𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡)
13:
if 𝑖 ≠⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉ −1 then
14:
𝑍𝑡(⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉−𝑖+1) ←𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡
, 𝑍𝑡←𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡
15:
else
16:
𝑍𝑡(⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉−𝑖+1) ←𝑍(𝑟)
𝑡
, 𝑍𝑡1 ←𝑍(𝑙)
𝑡
17:
end if
18:
end for
19: end for
20: return {𝑍1𝑖, 𝑍2𝑖|𝑍= ∏⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
𝑖=1
𝑍𝑖}
vector are congruent modulo 𝑛. This implies that the row sequence of 
1-valued units on the 𝑘𝑛-th non-zero diagonal of 𝑇forms a coset 𝑘 +⟨𝑛⟩
of an 𝑛-order subgroup ⟨𝑛⟩in ℤ∕𝑛2ℤ. According to Deﬁnition 3, their 
column sequences also form the same coset. If we attempt to decom-
pose any diagonal 𝑘𝑛in 𝑇onto a diagonal of index divisible by 𝑛in the 
right matrix 𝑇1 and the left matrix 𝑇2, then the 1-valued units on these 
two diagonals in the left and right matrices will inherit the property of 
forming the coset 𝑘 + ⟨𝑛⟩. Furthermore, if any two diagonals 𝑘𝑛and 𝑘′𝑛
with the coset properties 𝑖 + ⟨𝑛⟩and 𝑗+ ⟨𝑛⟩, respectively, are decom-
posed onto the 𝑘1𝑛diagonal of the right matrix (or left matrix), then the 
1-valued units in that diagonal will form a set (𝑖 + ⟨𝑛⟩) ∪𝑗+ ⟨𝑛⟩). Based 
on these observations, we can repeatedly decompose the diagonals in 𝑇
that have indices greater than the expected maximum non-zero diago-
nal index 𝑛 ⋅𝑛′ into diagonals 𝑘 −𝑛 ⋅𝑛′ and 𝑛 ⋅𝑛′, ultimately decomposing 
𝑇into the product of ⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉matrices:
𝑇=
⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
∏
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖.
(8)
Similar to the decomposition of Z, only the leftmost matrix in the prod-
uct contains non-zero diagonals with indices in {𝑘𝑛|𝑘 = 0, 1, … , 𝑛′}, 
while all other right matrices have only non-zero diagonals with indices 
𝑛′𝑛and 0. This implies that the complexity of the product is dominated 
by the complexity of the leftmost linear transformation, whose diago-
nal indices belong to a smaller range compared to the original approach. 
The detailed decomposition process is provided in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Diagonal Convergence Decompose for LinTrans T (DCD-
forT).
Input:
𝑛: the dimension parameter for creating a 𝑇with size 𝑛2 × 𝑛2;
𝑛′ ⋅𝑛: the target maximum non-zero diagonal index.
Output: {𝑇𝑖|𝑇= ∏⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖} decomposed matrices of linear transformation 𝑇.
1: Assume that all indices of diagonal vectors are in residual class [0, 𝑛2 −1]
2: for 𝑖 = 1 to ⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉ −1 do
3:
Initialize 𝑇(0) and 𝑇(1) as zero matrices.
4:
Traverse the 𝑖 ⋅𝑛-th non-zero diagonal of 𝑇, where 0 ≤𝑖 ≤𝑛′, and decompose it 
onto the 0th diagonal of the right matrix 𝑇(𝑟) and the 𝑖 ⋅𝑛-th diagonal of the left 
matrix 𝑇(𝑙).
5:
Traverse the 𝑖 ⋅𝑛-th non-zero diagonal of 𝑇, where 𝑛′ < 𝑖 ≤(𝑛 −1), and decompose 
it onto the 𝑛′ ⋅𝑛-th diagonal of the right matrix 𝑇(𝑟) and the (𝑖 −𝑛′) ⋅𝑛-th diagonal 
of the left matrix 𝑇(𝑙).
6:
(At this point, 𝑇= 𝑇(𝑙)𝑇(𝑟))
7:
if 𝑖 ≠⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉ −1 then
8:
𝑇⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉−𝑖+1 ←𝑇(𝑟), 𝑇←𝑇(𝑙)
9:
else
10:
𝑇⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉−𝑖+1 ←𝑇(𝑟), 𝑇1 ←𝑇(𝑙)
11:
end if
12: end for
13: return {𝑇𝑖|𝑇= ∏⌈𝑛−1
𝑛′ ⌉
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖}
After formulating the diagonal convergence decomposition for 𝑍
and 𝑇, we proceed to analyze its impact on the number of rotation 
keys and rotation complexity. Let 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 continue to represent the 
inner loop and outer loop counts of the original double-hoisting BSGS 
applied to 𝑍(or 𝑇). Since both the diagonal convergence decomposi-
tions for 𝑍and 𝑇are able to reduce the non-zero diagonal vectors from 
𝑛 −1 to 𝑛′, for a ﬁxed 𝑛1, the decomposition shrinks the number of keys 
required for the outer loop (of 𝑍and 𝑇) with a factor of 
𝑛′
2
𝑛2−1 , where 
𝑛′
2 = 𝑛′∕𝑛1. As for the rotation complexity, the primary complexity for 𝑍
and 𝑇after decomposition arises from the leftmost matrices in the ma-
trix products, which require (𝑛1 + 𝑛′
2)(𝑀𝑆+ 𝑃𝑚) + (𝑛′
2 + 1)(𝐷𝑝 + 𝑀𝐷). 
The extra (𝑛∕𝑛′ −1) ⋅(𝑀𝑆+𝑃𝑚 +𝐷𝑝 +𝑀𝐷) is attributed to the 𝑛∕𝑛′ −1
matrices on the right side. We compare the number of rotation keys 
and computational complexity (in terms of internal rotation operations) 
among the diagonal convergence decomposition, simple key substitu-
tion method, and the dh-BSGS algorithm without any key simpliﬁcation 
strategy for the 𝑍and 𝑇transformations, as shown in Table 2. More 
detailed experimental data obtained from speciﬁc conﬁgurations will 
be discussed in the implementation section. Additionally, we present 
the complete process of ciphertext decomposition matrix multiplication 
with diagonal convergence decomposition in Algorithm 6, omitting in-
ternal optimization details such as double-hoisting and hoisting, and 
providing a high-level illustrative ﬂow.
4.3. Security discussion
Theorem 2. The homomorphic encryption scheme, enhanced with the ho-
momorphic matrix multiplication with proposed hoisting optimization and

--- Page 9 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
9
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Algorithm 6 Matrix Multiplication using Diagonal Convergence Decom-
position (DMatrixMult).
Input:
ct(𝐴), ct(𝐵): ciphertexts encrypting matrices 𝐴and 𝐵with size 𝑛 × 𝑛;
𝑛′
𝑍: expected maximum non-zero diagonal index for 𝑍;
𝑛 ⋅𝑛′
𝑇: expected maximum non-zero diagonal index for 𝑇.
Output: ;
ct(𝐴𝐵): encrypted multiplication result between matrices 𝐴and 𝐵
1: {𝑍1𝑖}, {𝑍2𝑖} ←DCDforZ(𝑛2, 𝑛′
𝑍)
2: {𝑇𝑖} ←DCDforT(𝑛2, 𝑛 ⋅𝑛′
𝑇)
3: 𝑐𝑡(𝐴1), 𝑐𝑡(𝐴2) ←𝑐𝑡(𝐴)
4: 𝑐𝑡(𝐵(0)) ←𝑐𝑡(𝐵)
5: for 𝑍1𝑖in {𝑍1𝑖} do
6:
ct(𝐴1) ←LinTrans(ct(𝐴1), 𝑍1𝑖)
7: end for
8: for 𝑍2𝑖in {𝑍2𝑖} do
9:
𝑐𝑡(𝐴2) ←LinTrans(𝑐𝑡(𝐴2), 𝑍2𝑖)
10: end for
11: 𝑐𝑡(𝐴(0)) ←Add(𝑐𝑡(𝐴1), 𝑐𝑡(𝐴2))
12: for 𝑇𝑖in {𝑇𝑖} do
13:
ct(𝐵(0)) ←LinTrans(ct(𝐵(0)), 𝑇𝑖)
14: end for
15: ct(𝐴𝐵) ←Mul(ct(𝐴(0)), ct(𝐵(0)))
16: for 1 ≤𝑘 < 𝑛do
17:
ct(𝐴(𝑘)) ←LinTrans(ct(𝐴(0), 𝐶𝑘)
18:
ct(𝐵(𝑘)) ←LinTrans(ct(𝐵(0), 𝑅𝑘)
19:
ct(𝐴𝐵(𝑘)) ←Mul(ct(𝐴(𝑘)), ct(𝐵(𝑘)))
20:
ct(𝐴𝐵) ←Add(ct(𝐴𝐵(𝑘)), ct(𝐴𝐵))
21: end for
22: return ct(𝐴𝐵)
rotation key reduction techniques, maintains an equivalent level of security 
to the original scheme.
Proof. Our aforementioned modiﬁcations on the homomorphic multi-
plication exclusively manipulate existing ciphertexts and do not involve 
any participation of private keys. This implies that our revisions are 
independent of the security assumptions, encryption, and decryption 
processes of the underlying homomorphic encryption scheme.
□
According to Theorem 2, the IND-CPA nature of the homomorphic 
encryption scheme will not be aﬀected by our modiﬁed operations as 
long as its ciphertexts are originally pseudorandom. Theoretically, any 
entity that has access to corresponding public keys may perform these 
operations on ciphertexts, but the entity’s knowledge of the plaintext 
contained in the ciphertext remains unchanged before and after the 
operations.
5. Homomorphic covariance matrix computation for large 
datasets
In this section, We move on to present the method to pack large 
datasets into ciphertexts which enables seamless execution of the ho-
momorphic matrix multiplication (see Section 5.1) and a homomorphic 
circuit that eﬃciently computes the covariance matrix of the packed 
and encrypted dataset, see Section 5.2.
5.1. Ciphertext packing
For a given power of two, 𝑁, CKKS allows the encryption of a vector 
in ℂ𝑁∕2, as a whole to obtain a ciphertext (please refer to Appendix A
for more detail). Operations on the ciphertext may induce correspond-
ing computations on the underlying plaintext. Therefore, how we parti-
tion and package our dataset into ciphertexts signiﬁcantly impacts the 
eﬃciency of privacy-preserving computations. Let 𝑋be an 𝑠 ×𝑡dataset, 
where 𝑠represents the number of samples and 𝑡represents the number 
of features. We partition 𝑋into square submatrices with size 𝑛 × 𝑛, 
where 𝑛2 equals the CKKS scheme parameter 𝑁∕2. This allows us to 
encode each submatrix into one ciphertext. Features of the dataset are 
divided into 𝑘partitions, where 𝑘 = ⌈𝑡
𝑛⌉. In this way, each ciphertext 
will contain one partition of features from 𝑛samples/records. Note that 
𝑡is not always divisible by 𝑛, so zero-padding is necessary. Two possible 
methods for padding are as follows:
1. The ﬁrst 𝑘 −1 columns of submatrices each contain 𝑛features, 
while the last column of submatrices contains the last 𝑡 −𝑘 ⋅𝑛
features and pads the rest of its space with zeros. This approach 
expands the feature count from 𝑡to 𝑘 ⋅𝑛and treats each ciphertext 
as an 𝑛 × 𝑛matrix representing 𝑛samples with 𝑛features.
2. All columns of submatrices store only 𝑛 −𝑝valid features and pad 
the rest of their space with zeros, where 𝑝 = ⌊(𝑡 −𝑘 ⋅𝑛)∕𝑘⌋. This ap-
proach allows each ciphertext to be viewed as an 𝑛 ×(𝑛 −𝑝) matrix, 
taking advantage of some possible optimizations for rectangular 
matrix multiplication while still enabling operations on square ma-
trices.
In summary, ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉ ⋅𝑘ciphertexts are required to pack the entire 
dataset 𝑋.
5.2. Homomorphic covariance matrix computation for large datasets
We present a method for computing the covariance matrix of an 
encrypted dataset. Assume that we have partitioned 𝑋into ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉ ⋅𝑘
ciphertexts, with each ciphertext representing an 𝑛 × 𝑛submatrix of 
𝑋. We denote 𝑋𝑖as the 𝑖-th column submatrix of 𝑋, where 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘. 
We also denote 𝑋𝑖[𝓁] as the 𝓁-th submatrix of 𝑋𝑖and ct(𝑋𝑖[𝓁] as the 
ciphertext of 𝑋𝑖[𝓁]. We need to calculate the mean ‘vector’ 𝜇of the 
dataset if it is not centered. 𝜇is represented by 𝑘submatrices, where 
each column contains 𝑛replication of one feature’s mean value. 0 ≤
𝑖 < 𝑘, denote 𝜇[𝑖] as the 𝑖-th submatrix of the mean vector. 𝜇can be 
computed through the following equation:
𝜇[𝑖] = Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝓁<⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉
𝑋𝑖[𝓁];0
)
,
(9)
where Aggregate(𝑋; axis), axis ∈1,0 represents aggregating a matrix 𝑋
by columns (axis = 1) or by rows (axis = 0). This algorithm requires at 
most 1 multiplication depth (see Algorithm 7).
Algorithm 7 Aggregate.
Input:
𝑐𝑡(𝑋): encrypted matrix 𝑋with size row × col;
axis: aggregation axis.
Output:
𝑐𝑡(Aggregate(𝑋; axis))
1: 𝑐𝑡(𝐴) ←𝑐𝑡(𝑋)
2: if axis == 0 then
3:
for 𝑖 ←𝑐𝑜𝑙; 𝑖 < row ⋅col; 𝑖 = (𝑖 << 1) do
4:
𝑐𝑡(𝐴) ←Add(Rot(𝑐𝑡(𝐴); 𝑖), 𝑐𝑡(𝐴))
5:
end for
6: end if
7: if axis == 1 then
8:
for 𝑖 ←1; 𝑖 < col; 𝑖 = (𝑖 << 1) do
9:
𝑐𝑡(𝐴) ←Add(Rot(𝑐𝑡(𝐴); 𝑖), 𝑐𝑡(𝐴))
10:
end for
11:
𝑐𝑡(𝐴) ←Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝐴), 𝑝𝑡(𝑀)), where 𝑀is a mask matrix with the same dimensions 
as 𝑋, except for the ﬁrst column elements which are all 1 and other elements are 
0
12:
for 𝑖 ∶= −1; 𝑖 > −𝑐𝑜𝑙; 𝑖 = (𝑖 << 1) do
13:
𝑐𝑡(𝐴) ←Add(Rot(𝑐𝑡(𝐴); 𝑖), 𝑐𝑡(𝐴))
14:
end for
15: end if
16: return ct(𝐴)
Next, matrix 𝜇𝑇𝜇can be simply computed by transpositions and 
coordinate-wise multiplications:
𝜇𝑇𝜇𝑖[𝑗] = 𝜇[𝑗]𝑇⊙𝜇[𝑖].
(10)
We then move on to compute each submatrix unit in 𝑋𝑇𝑋. For the 
submatrix 𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝑗], we iterate through each submatrix in column 𝑋𝑖

--- Page 10 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
10
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
and multiply it with the transposition of the corresponding submatrix 
in column 𝑋𝑗:
𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝑗] =
∑
0≤𝓁<⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉
𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝓁].
(11)
Here, each matrix multiplication can be performed in ciphertext space 
using our improved homomorphic matrix multiplication. If 𝑋is already 
centered, then 𝑋𝑇𝑋represents the covariance matrix. Otherwise, 𝑋𝑇𝑋
should be subtracted by 𝜇𝑇𝜇to become the covariance matrix. It is 
worth noting that directly computing the covariance matrix homomor-
phically using the equation above is not the most eﬃcient implementa-
tion. We provide the following optimizations:
1. Notice that for a given 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘, there is a one-to-many matrix mul-
tiplication scenario between 𝑋𝑗[𝓁] and matrix set {𝑋𝑖[𝓁]|0 ≤𝑖 <
𝑘} in the equation above. We can perform the inner product opera-
tions 
of 
𝑘
columns 
of 
submatrices 
in 
parallel:
∑
0≤𝓁<⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝓁], 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘, and save time by storing 
{𝐶𝑘𝑍ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇)|0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉}.
2. We can further cache all {𝑅𝑘𝑇𝑐𝑡(𝑋𝑖[𝓁])|0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉, 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘}, 
so that each 𝑋𝑖[𝓁] only needs to undergo one 𝑇transformation and 
𝑛 −1 row transformations throughout the entire covariance matrix 
computation process.
3. Based on the fact that the covariance matrix is a symmetric ma-
trix, it suﬃces to calculate the results of one side of the diagonal 
and transpose them to obtain the results for the other side, saving 
nearly half of the covariance computation time.
However, the ciphertexts required to be stored in Optimization 1 and 
2 usually cannot be fully cached in memory due to space limitations. 
Therefore, it is often necessary to split the dataset into suitable segments 
by rows and apply Optimization 1 and 2 segment by segment.
We present the computation of the entire encrypted covariance 
matrix with the aforementioned Optimization 3 in Algorithm 8. Op-
timization 1 and 2 are not explicitly shown in the algorithm since they 
involve restructuring the internal computation order of the DMtrixMult 
function. Theorem 3 provides the multiplication depth and computa-
tion complexity of Algorithm 8, where the computation complexity is 
measured at the granularity of matrix multiplications since matrix mul-
tiplication can be implemented using diﬀerent methods with varying 
complexities (such as whether to use Optimization 1 and 2).
Theorem 3. The multiplication depth of Algorithm 8 is 2 + max(⌈(𝑛−1)
𝑛𝑍⌉,
⌈(𝑛−1)∗𝑛
𝑛𝑇
⌉) + 2, and the time complexity is dominated by the number of ma-
trix multiplications, which is 𝑂(⌈𝑘2
2 ⌉ ⋅⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉).
Proof. We need 2 multiplication depths for matrix transpositions, 2 
depths for column shiftings and ciphertext multiplications in the DMa-
trixMult function, and 𝑘 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑘1, 𝑘2) depths for the linear transfor-
mations 𝑍and 𝑇, where 𝑘1 = ⌈(𝑛−1)
𝑛𝑍⌉is the number of depth used for 
decomposed 𝑍, and 𝑘2 = ⌈(𝑛−1)⋅𝑛
𝑛𝑇
⌉is the number of depth used for de-
composed 𝑇.
□
6. Privacy-preserving PCA using homomorphic PowerMethod
We present the homomorphic evaluation circuit of the PowerMethod 
algorithm in the ﬁrst subsection and demonstrate the process of per-
forming privacy-preserving PCA utilizing our homomorphic Power-
Method circuit in the second subsection. In the ﬁnal subsection, we pro-
vide comprehensive security proof for our proposed privacy-preserving 
PCA.
Algorithm 
8 
Homomorphic 
Covariance 
Matrix 
Computation 
(HCovMtrx).
Input:
{ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁])|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘, 0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉}: partitioned and encrypted dataset;
𝑛𝑍: maximum diagonal index for transformation 𝑍;
𝑛𝑇: maximum diagonal index 𝑛𝑇for transformation 𝑇;
Output:
{ct(Cov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}: partitioned and encrypted covariance matrix.
1: for 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘do
2:
Take ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]), 0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉, ct(𝜇[𝑗]) ←∑
0≤𝓁<⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉𝑋𝑖[𝓁]
3:
for 𝑛 ≤𝑡 < 𝑛2 do
4:
𝑐𝑡(𝜇[𝑗]) ←Add(ct(𝜇[𝑗]), Rot(ct(𝜇[𝑗]); 𝑡))
5:
𝑡 ←𝑡 << 1
6:
end for
7:
ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇) ←LinTrans(ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]), G) {perform transposition with permutation ma-
trix 𝐺in parallel for 0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉}
8:
for 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑗do
9:
ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝓁]) ←DMtrxMul(ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇), ct(𝑋𝑖[𝓁]), 𝑛, 𝑛𝑍, 𝑛𝑇) {compute in par-
allel for 0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉}
10:
ct(𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝑗]) ←∑
0≤𝑖<𝑘ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁]𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝓁]); {aggregate the parallel computation re-
sults}
11:
end for
12: end for
13: for 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘do
14:
for 𝑗≤𝑖 < 𝑘do
15:
𝑐𝑡(𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝑗]) ←LinTrans(𝑐𝑡(𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑗[𝑖]), G)
16:
end for
17: end for
18: for 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘do
19:
ct(𝜇[𝑗]𝑇) ←LinTrans(ct(𝜇[𝑗]), 𝑇)
20:
for 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘do
21:
ct(𝜇𝑇𝜇𝑖[𝑗]) ←Mul(ct(𝜇[𝑗]𝑇), ct(𝜇[𝑖]))
22:
ct(Cov𝑖[𝑗]) ←Add(𝑐𝑡(𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑖[𝑗]), 𝑐𝑡(−𝜇𝑇𝜇𝑖[𝑗]))
23:
end for
24: end for
25: return {ct(Cov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}
6.1. Homomorphic PowerMethod circuit
We divide the demonstration of the homomorphic PowerMethod 
into three pivotal components: (i) the continuous transformation of the 
covariance matrix, (ii) the normalization of the approximate eigenvec-
tor, and (iii) the computation of the eigenvalue corresponding to the 
eigenvector.
6.1.1. Covariance matrix transformation
For a column vector (or row vector) with 𝑡components (𝑡is denoted 
as the number of features in Section 5.1), we replicate it into a column 
(or row) of submatrices using the following approach:
1. Divide the vector evenly into 𝑘segments where each segment con-
tains 𝑛entries. The zero padding strategy is needed and should be 
consistent with the one used in ciphertext packing when 𝑡is not 
divisible by 𝑘.
2. Horizontally (or vertically) replicate these 𝑘segments of column 
vectors (or row vectors) 𝑛times to construct 𝑘submatrices.
The continuous linear transformation will be alternately applied to the 
horizontally replicated vector and the vertically replicated vector. Let 
𝑉𝑡−1 be a set of sub-matrices representing a replicated column vector 
𝐯𝑡−1. For 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘, the covariance matrix transformation 𝐯𝑡= Cov𝐯𝑡−1
can be computed as:
𝑉𝑡[𝑖] = Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑘
(Cov𝑗[𝑖] ⊙𝑉𝑡−1[𝑗]𝑇)𝑇;0
)
= Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑘
Cov𝑗[𝑖]𝑇⊙𝑉𝑡−1[𝑗];0
)
.
(12)
Here, 𝑉𝑡= {𝑉𝑡[𝑖]|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘} represent the replicated row vector 𝑣𝑇
𝑡. If 
𝑉𝑡−1 represents a replicated row vector 𝐯𝑇
𝑡−1, then for 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘, the: 
covariance matrix transformation 𝐯𝑇
𝑡= 𝐯𝑇
𝑡−1Cov can be computed as:

--- Page 11 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
11
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
𝑉𝑡[𝑖] = Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑘
𝑉𝑡−1[𝑗] ⊙Cov𝑖[𝑗]𝑇;1
)
,
(13)
where 𝑉𝑡represents the replicated column vector 𝐯𝑡. This equation 
holds because the covariance matrix Cov is symmetric, i.e., Cov𝑗[𝑖]𝑇=
Cov𝑖[𝑗]. Now We can perform the covariance matrix transformation on 
a vector continuously using these two equations alternately.
The entire process of the continuous covariance matrix transforma-
tion can be described as the following. At the onset of the PowerMethod 
iteration, we initially select a row vector as the approximate eigenvec-
tor, denoted as 𝑣0. We replicate it into a row of submatrices denoted as 
𝑉0. The set of submatrices representing the approximate eigenvector in 
the 𝑡-th iteration is computed as:
𝑉𝑡[𝑖] =Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑘
𝑉𝑡−1[𝑗] ⊙Cov𝑗[𝑖];𝑡+ 1 mod 2
)
⋅(𝑡+ 1 mod 2)+
Aggregate
(
∑
0≤𝑗<𝑘
𝑉𝑡−1[𝑗] ⊙Cov𝑖[𝑗];𝑡mod 2
)
⋅(𝑡mod 2).
(14)
6.1.2. Vector normalization
Vector normalization should be performed in each iteration of the 
PowerMethod to the length of the eigenvectors from continually in-
creasing or decreasing, which could lead to overﬂow. Normalizing a 
vector 𝐯is done by applying a scaling factor of 
1
||𝐯||2 to each component 
of the vector. Speciﬁcally, the scaling factor is obtained by evaluating 
the InvSRT function at the point ⟨𝐯,𝐯⟩. We mentioned that we can only 
use the iterative InvSRT algorithm to approximate the eﬀect of InvSRT 
in the homomorphic encryption scenario (see Section 3.7). We summa-
rize the following factors that signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the accuracy of the 
iterative InvSRT algorithm:
1. Initial approximation: Given a ﬁxed number of iterations, a closer 
initial approximation to the exact value yields more accurate re-
sults from the iterative algorithm. Conversely, an initial estimate 
that deviates signiﬁcantly from the exact value may prevent the 
iterative algorithm from converging. Since the function 
1
√
𝑥ex-
hibits signiﬁcant changes in slope on both sides of 1, resembling 
an “L” shape, determining an initial approximation that simulta-
neously approximates the exact value on both sides of 1 using a 
simple function (such as a low-degree polynomial) may be insuf-
ﬁcient. However, constructing an initial approximation evaluation 
method that closely approximates the exact value on both sides of 
the evaluation interval can itself be a complex task. For example, 
approaches such as the piecewise function used in Panda (2022)
or the rational polynomial function discussed in Qu and Xu (2022)
yield initial estimates that are closer to the exact value. However, 
even these functions require an iterative approximation in the ho-
momorphic setting.
2. Number of iterations: The more iterations performed, the closer the 
output of the iterative InvSqrt algorithm will be to the exact value.
To set up a good iterative InvSRT algorithm for the vector normaliza-
tion in the homomorphic PowerMethod, our ﬁrst step is to determine 
the upper bound of the norm of the approximate eigenvectors in order 
to establish the evaluation interval for the iterative InvSRT. Subse-
quently, we propose a Lazy Normalization strategy for the approximate 
eigenvector normalization in the PowerMethod. This strategy tolerates 
imprecise outputs of the iterative InvSRT algorithm within the input in-
terval (0,1] during some rounds of the PowerMethod. However, it aims 
to achieve highly accurate outputs in the ﬁnal iteration to ensure that 
the resulting eigenvectors are normalized.
Estimating the upper bound of the norm
After the dataset has undergone 
normalization and centering, we assume that all of its units are bounded 
within 𝑏 > 0. For each element in the covariance matrix Cov, we have 
the bound |Cov𝑖𝑗| = 1
𝑛| ⟨𝐱𝑖,𝐱𝑗
⟩| ≤𝑏2, where 𝐱𝑖, 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑑represents the 
vector composed of the 𝑖-th feature values of all samples in the dataset. 
Therefore, the Euclidean norm of vector Cov𝑖is bounded by ||Cov𝑖||2 ≤
√
𝑏4 ⋅𝑑. With this information, we can estimate the upper bound of 
the norm for an approximate eigenvector 𝐲produced by the covariance 
matrix transformation 𝐲= Cov ⋅𝐯with the following inequality:
||𝐲||2 =
√
√
√
√
𝑑
∑
𝑖=1
|𝑦𝑖|2
=
√
√
√
√
𝑑
∑
𝑖=1
(Cov𝑖1𝑣1 + Cov𝑖2𝑣2 + ⋯+ Cov𝑖𝑑𝑣𝑑)2 ≤𝑏2 ⋅𝑐⋅𝑑,
(15)
where the Euclidean norm of the input approximate eigenvector 𝐯is 
bounded by 𝑐. In practical applications, diﬀerent feature columns 𝐱𝑖
may have diﬀerent bounds 𝑏𝑖. If the cloud service provider has legal 
access to these bounds, tighter upper bounds can be constructed. In this 
case, we have Cov𝑖𝑗= 1
𝑛| ⟨𝐱𝑖,𝐱𝑗
⟩| ≤𝑏𝑖𝑏𝑗, ||Cov𝑖||2 ≤
√∑
0≤𝑗<𝑑𝑏2
𝑖𝑏2
𝑗, 
and the upper bound of the Euclidean norm of 𝐲can be expressed as:
||𝐲||2 =
√
√
√
√
𝑑
∑
𝑖=1
(Cov𝑖1𝑣1 + Cov𝑖2𝑣2 + ⋯+ Cov𝑖𝑑𝑣𝑑)2
≤
√
√
√
√
√
𝑑
∑
𝑖=1
(
𝑑
∑
𝑗=1
𝑏2
𝑖𝑏2
𝑗) ⋅𝑐2).
(16)
Lazy normalization
Based on the upper bound of the Euclidean norm, 
we design a vector normalization method called Lazy Normalization
to scale the eigenvectors. Let 𝐲remain the approximate eigenvector 
obtained from the covariance matrix transformation 𝐲= Cov ⋅𝐯, and 
denote the upper bound for its Euclidean norm as 𝐵. We then set 
the evaluation interval for the iterative InvSRT algorithm as (0, 𝐵2]. 
As previously mentioned in this section, a reasonably accurate initial 
approximation within this interval should be identiﬁed to reduce the 
number of rounds executed in the iterative InvSRT. To achieve this, 
we conduct an odd-degree Taylor expansion 𝑇(𝑥) of 𝑓(𝑥) =
1
√
𝑥cen-
tered at the midpoint 𝐵2∕2 + 1. This expansion serves as the initial 
approximation function for the iterative InvSRT (see Algorithm 9). It 
has been empirically demonstrated that such a Taylor expansion en-
ables the subsequent iterative InvSRT to converge within a relatively 
modest number of iterations (Qu and Xu, 2022), as compared to alter-
native approaches (Gizem et al., 2015), (Panda, 2021), (Panda, 2022). 
The iterative InvSRT then takes the initial approximation 𝑇(⟨𝐲,𝐲⟩) as 
input and iterate 𝜏times to obtain a more accurate value of 
1
||𝐲||2 . The 
approximate eigenvector is then multiplied by the output of the itera-
tive InvSRT to perform the normalization.
For any 𝑥 ∈(0, 𝑏4 ⋅𝑐2 ⋅𝑑2], it holds that 𝑇(𝑥) ≤
1
√
𝑥(Qu and Xu, 
2022). Furthermore, the iterative InvSRT output is no greater than the 
ground truth of InvSRT (Theorem 4). Hence, we can estimate that both 
the Euclidean have an upper bound of 1 after the normalization. This 
allows us to recompute the upper bound of the Euclidean norm for the 
next approximate eigenvector 𝐲′ = Cov ⋅𝐲. In particular, if the length of 
𝐯is initially 1, then the upper bound of ||𝐲′||2 remains unchanged and 
equal to the upper bound of ||𝐲||2.
The degree of 𝑇(𝑥) is minimized to prevent generating extremely 
small high-degree coeﬃcients that exceed the precision range of the 
homomorphic encryption scheme. This may lead to a result that the 
accuracy of 𝑇(𝑥) in the interval (0, 1) is lower compared to the interval 
[1, 𝐵2], due to the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in slopes on both sides of 1 for 
1
√
𝑥. Subsequent iterative InvSRT inherits this disparity of accuracy. It 
is impractical to achieve the same level of accuracy for the iterative 
InvSRT across the evaluation interval (0, 1) as in the interval [1, 𝐵2],

--- Page 12 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
12
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
since a signiﬁcant number of iterations is required. The best we can 
do is to make an assumption that the covariance matrix transformation 
does not shrink the length of vectors by more than a factor of 𝑆. Based 
on this assumption, we can attempt to ensure that (i) the length of the 
eigenvector does not underﬂow during the PowerMethod iterations and 
(ii) the length of the ﬁnal output eigenvector from the PowerMethod is 
suﬃciently close to 1.
Therefore, our strategy is as follows. Let 𝐵′ be a precision bound, 𝑒
be an error bound, and 𝑡be the expected number of PowerMethod iter-
ations. Denote 𝑆as the contraction coeﬃcient of the covariance matrix 
transformation, which means that any vector, when transformed by the 
covariance matrix, is reduced in length by at most a factor of 𝑆. We then 
simulate the PowerMethod iterations on a unit-length vector to obtain 
the best-ﬁt number of iterative InvSRT iterations in each PowerMethod 
iteration:
1. We start with an initial length 𝑙of 1. In each PowerMethod itera-
tion, we ﬁrst update 𝑙directly as 𝑙←𝑙⋅𝑆, without performing any 
actual covariance matrix transformation.
2. Subsequently, we evaluate 𝑇(𝑙2) and feed it into the iterative In-
vSRT. The resulting output, denoted as 𝑆′, must satisfy the follow-
ing two conditions: (i) (𝑙⋅𝑆′ ⋅𝑆)2 should not underﬂow beyond the 
predetermined precision bound 𝐵′, and (ii) the value 1 −𝑙⋅𝑆′ must 
be smaller than 𝑒in the ﬁnal iteration of the PowerMethod.
3. 𝑙is updated as 𝑙←𝑙⋅𝑆′ in preparation for the subsequent round of 
PowerMethod iteration.
4. We maintain a record of the number of iterations employed by the 
iterative InvSRT during each iteration of the PowerMethod. In the 
actual homomorphic PowerMethod computation, we rely on these 
recorded iteration counts to perform the iterative InvSRT.
Up to this point, our Lazy Normalization strategy can be uniquely 
characterized by its evaluation interval (0, 𝐵2], initial approximation 
function 𝑇, precision bound 𝐵′, error bound 𝑒, number of Power-
Method iterations 𝑡, and the number of iterative InvSRT iterations per 
PowerMethod iteration. Consequently, we can conclude that the Lazy 
Normalization strategy is capable of accommodating 𝑡PowerMethod 
iterations that involve covariance matrix transformations with a con-
traction coeﬃcient of 𝑆while maintaining an error bound 𝑒and a 
precision bound 𝐵′.
Theorem 4. If Algorithm 3 is given an input 𝑦0 ≤
1
√𝑥0 , then in any itera-
tion, if 𝑦𝑖−1 ≤
1
√𝑥0 and 𝑦𝑖−1 > 0, it follows that 𝑦𝑖−1 ≤𝑦𝑖≤𝑥0.
Proof. When 𝑦𝑖−1 ≤
1
√𝑥0 and 𝑦𝑖−1 > 0, we have 0 < 𝑥0𝑦2
𝑖−1 ≤1. There-
fore, 𝑦𝑖≥𝑦𝑖. On the other hand, set 𝑦𝑖−1 = 𝑥0 −𝜖where 0 ≤𝜖<
1
√𝑥0 . 
We can express 𝑦𝑖as follows:
𝑦𝑖= 1
2(
1
√𝑥0
−𝜖)
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
3 −𝑥0 ⋅
(
1
√𝑥0
−𝜖
)2⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
= 1
2(
1
√𝑥0
−𝜖)(2 + 2√𝑥0𝜖−𝑥0𝜖2)
=
1
√𝑥0
−
√𝑥0𝜖2
2
−√𝑥0𝜖2 + 𝑥0𝜖3
2
≤
1
√𝑥0
.
□
(17)
6.1.3. Eigenvalue computation
The process of computing the eigenvalue is similar to completing 
another round of Power Method iterations. Let 𝐯be the eigenvector ob-
Algorithm 9 TaylorInit.
Input: 𝑐𝑡(𝑥): ciphertext encrypting value 𝑥; 𝐵: upper bound for the iterative InvSRT 
evaluation interval; 𝑜: truncation order.
Output: 𝑐𝑡(𝑥′), where 𝑥′ = 𝑇(𝑥), and 𝑇(𝑥) is the Taylor expansion polynomial of 1
√
𝑥at 
point 𝐵∕2 + 1 with truncated order 𝑜.
Algorithm 10 IterativInvSRTbyNewton.
Input: 𝑐𝑡(𝑥): ciphertext encrypting point; 𝑥𝑐𝑡(Guess): initial approximation of iterative 
InvSRT at point 𝑥; 𝜏: number of iterations.
Output: 𝑐𝑡(𝑥′), 𝑥′ ≈
1
√
𝑥
1: 𝑐𝑡(𝑥′) ←𝑐𝑡(Guess)
2: for i range 0 to 𝜏−1 do
3:
𝑐𝑡(Temp) ←Mult(
Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑥′),𝑐𝑡(𝑥′)),Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑥′),𝑐𝑡(𝑥)))
4:
𝑐𝑡(Temp) ←Sub(𝑐𝑡(Temp), PMult(𝑝𝑡(3), 𝑐𝑡(𝑥′)))
5:
𝑐𝑡(Temp) ←PMult(𝑝𝑡(1∕2), 𝑐𝑡(Temp))
6:
𝑐𝑡(𝑥′) ←𝑐𝑡(Temp)
7: end for
8: return 𝑐𝑡(𝑥′)
tained after 𝑡iterations. The eigenvalue 𝜆is given by 𝜆 = ⟨Cov⋅𝐯,𝐯⟩
⟨𝐯,𝐯⟩
. We 
know that 𝐯has been normalized after 𝑡iterations. Therefore, if we 
are conﬁdent enough in the accuracy of the normalization process, the 
eigenvalue computation can be simpliﬁed to 𝜆 = ⟨Cov ⋅𝐯,𝐯⟩. The pro-
cess of Cov ⋅𝐯is exactly the same as the ﬁrst half of a new round of 
Power Method iterations. However, Cov ⋅𝐯and 𝐯have diﬀerent orien-
tations, i.e., if one is a column vector, the other is a row vector, and 
vice versa. Therefore, when performing the dot product, we need to 
ﬂip the orientation of 𝐯to match that of Cov ⋅𝐯. The axis ﬂipping al-
gorithm (AxisFlipping) is provided in Algorithm (11). Next, computing 
⟨Cov ⋅𝐯,𝐯⟩only requires 𝑘ciphertext multiplications and one aggre-
gation operation. We can incorporate the eigenvalue computation into 
the PowerMethod iteration, speciﬁcally in the last round of the Power 
Method (total 𝑡 + 1 rounds), where the iteration is used to compute the 
eigenvalue instead of updating the eigenvector. Note that we need to 
retain 𝐯𝑇to compute the covariance matrix after the eigenvalue trans-
formation.
Algorithm 11 AxisFlipping.
Input:
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}: a set of encrypted matrices representing one replicated vector;
axis: the axis of the vector.
Output:
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}
1: Mask ←𝐼
2: for i range 0 to 𝑘 −1 do
3:
𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇) ←PMult(Mask, 𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]))
4:
𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇) ←Aggregate(𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇); axis + 1 mod 2)
5: end for
6: return {𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}
So far, we have discussed the three modules of the Power Method 
algorithm, namely the linear transformation of the covariance matrix, 
normalization of the eigenvectors, and computation of the eigenvalues. 
These modules cover all the processing details of the Power Method, 
and the complete process is provided in Algorithm 13, where the in-
voked iterative InvSRT algorithm is implemented by Newton’s method 
with a Taylor expansion as the initial approximation (see Algorithm 9
and 10). We analyze the multiplication depth and the computation com-
plexity of Algorithm 13 in Theorem 5.
Theorem 5. The multiplication depth of Algorithm 13 is 𝑂(𝑙𝑃⋅(3 +
log(order) + 3 ⋅𝑙𝑁+ 1) + 3), and the time complexity is dominated by 
𝑂((𝑙𝑃+ 1) ⋅(𝑘2 + 𝑘 + 𝑐+ 3 ⋅𝑙𝑁+ 1) −3 ⋅𝑙𝑁−1) ciphertext multiplications 
and 𝑂( 3𝑘+3
2
log𝑛 ⋅(𝑙𝑃+ 1)) ciphertext rotations, where 𝑐is the number of 
ciphertext multiplications needed for the Taylor polynomial evaluation.
Proof. In each round of the PowerMethod, a maximum of 3 multipli-
cation depths, 𝑘2 + 𝑘ciphertext multiplications, and (2𝑘 + 1) ⋅log𝑛(or

--- Page 13 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
13
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Algorithm 12 Homomorphic EigenShift (HEigenShift).
Input:
𝑐𝑡(𝜆), {𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}: the dominant eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenvec-
tor;
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}: the transposed eigenvector;
{ct(Cov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}: the covariance matrix;
Output:
{ct(SCov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}: the 1-shifted version of Cov.
1: for 0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘do
2:
for 0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘do
3:
ct(𝜆 ⋅𝑉𝑇𝑉𝑖[𝑗]) ←Mul(𝑐𝑡(𝜆), Mul(ct(𝑉[𝑗]𝑇), ct(𝑉[𝑖])))
4:
ct(SCov𝑖[𝑗]) ←Sub(𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑖[𝑗]), 𝑐𝑡(𝜆 ⋅𝑉𝑇𝑉𝑖[𝑗]))
5:
end for
6: end for
7: return {ct(SCov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}
(𝑘 + 2) ⋅log𝑛) ciphertext rotations are required to accomplish the co-
variance matrix transformation and one inner product. Subsequently, 
log(𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟) depths and 𝑐ciphertext multiplications are needed for the 
Taylor Expansion. Once we enter Newton’s Method iterative algorithm, 
each iteration necessitates 3 depths and 3 ciphertext multiplications. 
Lastly, a single multiplication depth is required to perform the cipher-
text multiplication for scaling the approximate eigenvector. After con-
ducting 𝑙𝑃rounds of PowerMethod iterations, an additional covariance 
matrix transformation and inner product are required to complete the 
eigenvalue calculation.
□
6.2. Privacy-preserving PCA
The ﬁnal step is to combine the Power Method with the EigenShift 
algorithm to compute multiple dominant eigenvectors and their corre-
sponding eigenvalues. After each execution of the Power Method, we 
replace the covariance matrix with its 1 shifted version, thereby ensur-
ing that for 1 ≤𝑘, the 𝑘-th round of the Power Method yields the 𝑘-th 
dominant eigenvector of the original covariance matrix of the dataset. 
The implementation of the homomorphic 1-th EigenShift algorithm is 
presented in Algorithm 12. It utilizes the dominant eigenvalue 𝜆and 
the corresponding eigenvector and its transpose 𝐯, 𝐯𝑇obtained in the 
previous Power Method iteration to update the covariance matrix as 
Cov′ = Cov −𝜆 ⋅𝐯𝑇𝐯. It can be proven that the 1-shifted covariance 
matrix always has a smaller ampliﬁcation eﬀect on the vectors than 
its non-shifted version (see Appendix B for details). Thereby, we do not 
need to recompute the upper bound for the norm of vectors transformed 
by the shifted covariance matrix in each execution of PowerMethod. 
The entire process of the privacy-preserving PCA algorithm is provided 
in Algorithm 14.
One more important consideration is the need for modulus refreshes 
when the multiplication depth of our algorithm exceeds the maximum 
multiplication depth supported by the underlying CKKS scheme. It is 
always necessary to carefully select appropriate positions in the algo-
rithm to perform modulus refreshes in order to minimize the overall 
number of refresh operations. We defer the discussion on the timing 
of the modulus refresh operations in our privacy-preserving PCA algo-
rithm to Appendix C for further details.
6.3. Security analysis
Theorem 6. The proposed Privacy-Preserving PCA securely and correctly 
computes the target approximate dominant eigenvectors and eigenvalues of 
the private dataset in the semi-honest security model, provided that the un-
derlying homomorphic encryption scheme is IND-CPA secure.
Proof. Let the encryption and decryption routines of the underlying 
homomorphic encryption scheme be the 𝐸𝑛𝑐and 𝐷𝑒𝑐functions in the 
proposed system architecture (see Section 3.2). Given that the homo-
morphic encryption is IND-CPA secure, the ciphertext 𝑐𝑡(𝑋) holding 
Algorithm 13 Homomorphic PowerMethod (HPowerMethod).
Input:
{ct(Cov𝑖[𝑗])|0 ≤𝑖, 𝑗< 𝑘}: the encrypted covariance matrix;
𝑙𝑃: iterations for the PowerMethod;
𝑙𝑁: iterations for the InvSRTByNewton;
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉0[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}: encrypted submatrices representing the initial selection for the 
approximated eigenvector;
axis: the axis of the current approximate eigenvectors, where axis = 0 represents row 
vectors with all rows being equal and axis = 1 represents column vectors with all 
columns being equal;
𝐵: upper bound for the iterative InvSRT evaluation interval;
𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟: truncation order for the Taylor initialization.
Output:
𝑐𝑡(𝜆), {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑙𝑃−1[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}, {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑙𝑃−1[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}: Dominant eigenvalue of the 
covariance matrix, the corresponding eigenvector, along with its transposition.
1: for 𝑡range 0 to 𝑙𝑃do
2:
for i range 0 to k-1 do
3:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←𝑐𝑡(𝟎)
4:
for 𝑗= 0; 𝑗< 𝑘; 𝑗+ + do
5:
if axis == 0 then
6:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←Add(Mult(𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑗[𝑖]), 𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡[𝑖])), 𝑐𝑡(Sum))
7:
else if axis == 1 then
8:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←Add(Mult(𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑖[𝑗]), 𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡[𝑖])), 𝑐𝑡(Sum))
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖]) ←Aggregate(𝑐𝑡(Sum); axis + 1 mod 2)
12:
end for
13:
axis ←axis + 1 mod 2
14:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←𝑐𝑡(𝟎)
15:
for i range 0 to k-1 do
16:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←Add(Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖]), 𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖])), 𝑐𝑡(Sum))
17:
end for
18:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←Aggregate(𝑐𝑡(Sum); axis + 1 mod 2)
19:
if 𝑛 < 𝑙𝑃then
20:
𝑐𝑡(Guess) ←TaylorInit(𝑐𝑡(Sum), 𝐵, 𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟)
21:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←IterativInvSRTbyNewton(𝑐𝑡(Guess), 𝑐𝑡Sum, 𝑙𝑁)
22:
for i range 0 to k-1 do
23:
𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖]) ←Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖]), 𝑐𝑡(Sum))
24:
end for
25:
end if
26:
if 𝑡 = 𝑙𝑃then
27:
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘} ←AxisFlipping({𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}, axis + 1 mod 2)
28:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←𝑐𝑡(𝟎)
29:
for i range 0 to k-1 do
30:
𝑐𝑡(Sum) ←Add(Mult(𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡+1[𝑖]), 𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑡[𝑖])), 𝑐𝑡(Sum))
31:
end for
32:
𝑐𝑡(𝜆) ←Aggregate(𝑐𝑡(Sum); axis + 1 mod 2)
33:
end if
34: end for
35: return 𝑐𝑡(𝜆), {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑙𝑃−1[𝑖]𝑇)|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}, {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑙𝑃−1[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}
Algorithm 14 Privacy-Preserving PCA.
Input:
{ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁])|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘, 0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉}: partitioned and encrypted dataset;
𝑛𝑍: maximum diagonal index for transformation 𝑍;
𝑛𝑇: maximum diagonal index 𝑛𝑇for transformation 𝑇;
𝑙𝐸: expected number of eigenvectors or principal components. 𝑙𝑃: iterations for the 
PowerMethod;
𝑙𝑁: iterations for the InvSRTByNewton;
𝐵: upper bound for the iterative InvSRT evaluation interval;
𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟: truncation order for the Taylor initialization.
Output:
{{𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}𝑗|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑙𝐸} , {𝑐𝑡(𝜆𝑗)|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑙𝐸}: 𝑙𝐸dominant eigenvectors and 
the corresponding eigenvalues.
1: {𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑗[𝓁])} ←HCovMtrx(ct(𝑋𝑗[𝓁])|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑘,0 ≤𝓁< ⌈𝑠∕𝑛⌉, 𝑛𝑍, 𝑛𝑇)
2: for 𝑚 ∶= 0; 𝑚 < 𝑙𝐸; 𝑚 + + do
3:
{𝑐𝑡(𝑉0[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘} ←Randomly Generate with 𝓁2 = 1
4:
axis ←1
5:
𝑐𝑡(𝜆𝑚), {𝑐𝑡(𝑉)}𝑚, {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑇)}𝑚, ←
HPowerMethod({𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑗[𝓁])}, 𝑙𝑃, 𝑙𝑁, {𝑐𝑡(𝑉0[𝑖])},
axis, 𝐵, order)
6:
{𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑗[𝓁])} ←HEigenShift(𝑐𝑡(𝜆𝑚), {𝑐𝑡(𝑉)}𝑚, {𝑐𝑡(𝑉𝑇)}𝑚, {𝑐𝑡(Cov𝑗[𝓁])})
7: end for
8: return {{𝑐𝑡(𝑉[𝑖])|0 ≤𝑖 < 𝑘}𝑗|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑙𝐸} , {𝑐𝑡(𝜆𝑗)|0 ≤𝑗< 𝑙𝐸}
the private dataset 𝑋from the user looks pseudorandom to the cloud. 
At any point during the execution of the privacy-preserving PCA proto-
col, the user only decrypts the received ciphertexts locally. So the cloud

--- Page 14 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
14
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Table 3
Run-time performance Comparison of LinTrans 𝑍, 𝑇
between original double-
hoisting BSGS(dh-BSGS) and our Diagonal Convergence Decomposed scheme 
(DCDmp). Rtk(MB) represents the total space required for rotation keys, while
Ct(MB) represents the total space required for caching hoisted ciphertexts during 
linear transformations, both measured in MB (megabytes).
Scheme
Matrix
𝑛1
MaxDiagNo.
Rtk (MB)
Ct (MB)
time (s)
Depth
dh-BSGS
Z
8
127
1755
53
2.004
1
DCDmp
Z
8
64
1080
53
1.362
2
DCDmp
Z
8
32
720
53
1.249
4
dh-BSGS
Z
16
127
1395
113
1.286
1
DCDmp
Z
16
64
1080
113
1.094
2
DCDmp
Z
16
32
900
113
1.179
4
dh-BSGS
T
8
127 ⋅128
1035
53
1.049
1
DCDmp
T
8
64 ⋅128
720
53
0.701
2
DCDmp
T
8
32 ⋅128
540
53
0.652
4
dh-BSGS
T
16
127 ⋅128
1035
113
0.725
1
DCDmp
T
16
64 ⋅128
900
113
0.572
2
DCDmp
T
16
32 ⋅128
810
113
0.613
4
only learns the parameters for initializing the protocol, and nothing 
more.
□
7. Implementation
We implement all the proposed algorithms described in the previous 
sections using the Lattigo library V4.1.0 (Lattigo, 2022), which pro-
vides an implementation of the full-RNS CKKS scheme in Golang. The 
implementation of all the algorithms can be found in Ma (2023). Our ex-
periments are conducted on a machine running Windows 10, equipped 
with an AMD Ryzen 7 7735HS (3.19 GHz) processor and 32 GB of mem-
ory.
First, we present the performance results of the 𝑍and 𝑇linear trans-
formations using our diagonal convergence decomposition technique 
proposed in Section 4. Then, we proceed to report the performance of 
our privacy-preserving PCA and compare it with the state-of-art work 
by Panda (Panda, 2021). Their work is the most relevant to our sce-
nario, as it also focuses on designing privacy-preserving PCA based on 
the CKKS scheme in a cloud computing service setting.
It’s worth noting that the pioneering works by Rathee et al. and Lu 
et al. are also relevant to the cloud computing scenario (Lu et al., 2016), 
(Rathee et al., 2018). However, as explained in Related Work (see Sec-
tion 2.1), their adoption of a homomorphic encryption scheme that only 
permits integer operations necessitates users to compute vector normal-
ization on their own. This disparity makes a direct comparison between 
our approach and theirs challenging, given our emphasis on minimizing 
user computational load in the protocol, wherein users refrain from ex-
ecuting any operations beyond protocol initialization, encryption, and 
decryption.
7.1. Performance of 𝑍and 𝑇using diagonal convergence decomposition
We conduct tests on the space optimization eﬀect of our Diagonal 
Convergence Decomposition on the 128 × 128 double-hoisting matrix 
multiplication. We evaluate the performance of the 𝑍and 𝑇transfor-
mations decomposed at diﬀerent maximum expected diagonal indices 
and compare them with the original double-hoisting ones with no de-
composition applied (see Table 3). The evaluation is conducted on a 
concrete CKKS instance that oﬀers a maximum available modulus level 
of 14 with parameters: log𝑁= 15, log𝑏 = 760, 𝜎= 3.2 (see Appendix A
for detailed parameter explanation). A baseline level of 14 −4 = 10 is 
set, and the initial modulus levels for all tested transformations are as-
signed appropriately to ensure that all transformation results fall down 
to the baseline level. From Table 3, we can observe that for a ﬁxed in-
ner loop count, a smaller expected maximum diagonal index leads to a 
greater reduction in key space. In the decomposition with an expected 
maximum diagonal index four times smaller than 128, we successfully 
reduce the rotation key space of 𝑍by 58% for an inner loop of 8 and 
by 35% for an inner loop of 16.
Additionally, our decomposition improves the computation speed of 
𝑍and 𝑇. This is because, within the matrix transformation product 
chain obtained after decomposition, the transformations that are ini-
tially performed at high levels (the ones on the right-hand side of the 
chain) require only a small amount of complexity, and the main com-
plexity arises from the ﬁnal matrix transformation in the chain (the one 
on the left-hand side), which is performed at the same level as the origi-
nal scheme and has a smaller scale compared to the transformation that 
was not decomposed. Therefore, our decomposition scheme provides an 
optimized trade-oﬀ between space and speed, making the overall matrix 
multiplication scheme more ﬂexible.
7.2. Privacy-preserving PCA
7.2.1. Accuracy measurement
We provide a metric called 𝑅2(𝑉) to measure the accuracy of the 
privacy-preserving PCA algorithm. It represents the R2 score between 
the results computed by privacy-preserving PCA and the ground truth 
principal components computed using the np.linalg.eig function from the 
numpy package in Python. A higher value of 𝑅2(𝑉), closer to 1, indi-
cates that the principal components obtained from privacy-preserving 
PCA are more similar to the ones obtained using plaintext routines.
7.2.2. Experimental setup
Modulus refresh strategy selection
The modulus refresh operation in 
our privacy-preserving PCA algorithm can be theoretically achieved 
through the following two approaches based on the cloud service sce-
nario.
1. The interactive strategy: the cloud service provider sends the ci-
phertexts that have reached the maximum depth to the user. The 
user then decrypts these ciphertexts, re-encrypts them on the max-
imum modulus level, and sends them back to the cloud for further 
homomorphic computation. This approach introduces communica-
tion overhead and requires the user to listen to the cloud continu-
ously.
2. The non-interactive strategy: the cloud service provider performs 
bootstrapping locally on the ciphertexts. While several bootstrap-
ping methods designed for CKKS have been proposed in recent 
years, their software implementations are still relatively time-
consuming. Therefore, the number of modulus refreshes will be-
come one of the dominant factors in the algorithm’s time complex-
ity when using this strategy.
We use the interactive modulus refresh strategy throughout our ex-
periment since our algorithm consumes a large number of modulus

--- Page 15 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
15
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Fig. 2. PowerMethod Simulations for Vector Normalization Parameterization. The ﬁgures presented on the left and right respectively illustrate the evolution of 
vector lengths and the number of iterative InvSRT iterations per PowerMethod iteration in 4 and 14 rounds of simulations. The simulations are conducted with an 
error bound of 𝑒 = 1𝑒 −5 and a precision bound of 𝑝 = 1𝑒 −3.
levels and does not yield satisfactory results when the bootstrapping 
routine is utilized to achieve the non-iterative modulus refresh strat-
egy. However, it is worth noting that there exist hardware-accelerated 
solutions for bootstrapping that can signiﬁcantly reduce its computa-
tional overhead. Our privacy-preserving PCA algorithm may become 
truly practical under the non-interactive modulus refresh strategy with 
such hardware optimizations.
Parameterization for underlying homomorphic encryption scheme
We set 
up a concrete CKKS instance with parameters log𝑁= 15, 𝑏 = 720, 𝜎=
3.2, 𝛿= 40 as the underlying homomorphic encryption scheme of our 
privacy-preserving PCA algorithm (see Appendix A for the explanation 
of parameters), ensuring 128-bit security. This instance provides 13 lev-
els of 40-bit moduli and achieves 20 bits of precision.
Dataset preprocessing
We conduct our privacy-preserving PCA algo-
rithm on the MNIST (Deng, 2012), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), 
and YALE (Belhumeur et al., 1997) datasets. The preprocessing of the 
three datasets, including cropping, is performed exactly as described 
in the work by Panda (Panda, 2021). The images in the MNIST and 
Fashion-MNIST datasets are cropped to 16x16 pixels, and the Yale sam-
ples are converted to grayscale and cropped from 195 x 231 pixels to 
16x16 pixels. In the subsequent experiments, we will extract a spe-
ciﬁc number of samples 𝑠from these datasets to construct new datasets 
for testing our algorithm. All the datasets used in the experiments are 
divided into submatrices of size 128 × 128 since our underlying homo-
morphic encryption scheme oﬀers a plaintext space of ℂ14 where each 
ciphertext can accommodate exactly one submatrix.
Parameterization for covariance matrix computation
Our covariance ma-
trix computation is designed to harness the advantages of parallel 
matrix multiplications. We employ a single thread to compute the co-
variance matrix in cases where the dataset size is no larger than 2 × 2
sub-matrices. As for dataset sizes surpassing this threshold, we allocate 
seven threads to compute the corresponding covariance matrix. The 
128 ×128 matrix multiplications within the covariance matrix computa-
tion are implemented by our optimized matrix multiplication algorithm 
equipped with the hoisting techniques and a Diagonal Convergence De-
composition strategy with an expected maximum non-zero diagonal 
index of 32. This conﬁguration reduces 35% and 20% in the requi-
site number of rotation keys for the 𝑍and 𝑇transformations with an 
inner loop count of 16, respectively. Such optimization mitigates the 
risk of memory saturation, diminishes the communication overhead be-
tween the user and the cloud, and decreases computational time. We 
also implement all three covariance matrix computation optimizations 
mentioned in Section 5.2. Speciﬁcally, we group every 1400 rows of 
samples into one segment and apply optimizations 1 and 2 to each seg-
ment when the dataset contains more than 1400 rows. The covariance 
matrices computed from diﬀerent segments are aggregated to obtain 
the ﬁnal result.
Parameterization for vector normalization
In section 6.1.2, we estimate 
that performing a covariance matrix transformation on a vector of 
length 𝑐results in a transformed vector with an upper bound length 
of 𝑏2 ⋅𝑐⋅𝑑, where 𝑏is the upper bound of all elements in the covariance 
matrix and 𝑑is the number of features in the dataset. Since the upper 
bound length of the transformed vector will be used to set up the eval-
uation interval of the iterative InvSRT function, we should not let this 
upper bound be too big or it will be too expensive to evaluate the In-
vSRT function across the interval. Thereby, we scale all samples in the 
preprocessed datasets by a factor of 1/255, resulting in an upper bound 
𝑏 = 1 for all elements in their covariance matrices.
Following the Lazy Normalization strategy, we set the evaluation in-
terval of the iterative InvSRT function to [0.1−7, 𝑏2 ⋅𝑐⋅𝑑] and use a linear 
Taylor expansion at point 216∕2 + 1 to obtain the initial approximation 
of the iterative InvSRT algorithm. We determine through experimen-
tation that the iterative InvSRT requires a minimum of 𝑘 = 12 basic 
iterations to achieve the desired accuracy within the evaluation inter-
val [1, 216]. In order to make the Lazy Normalization strategy capable of 
accommodating up to 𝑙𝑃PowerMethod iterations that involve covari-
ance matrix transformations with a contraction coeﬃcient of 0.5 while 
maintaining an error bound 𝑒 = 1𝑒 −5 and a precision bound 𝑝 = 1𝑒 −3, 
PowerMethod simulations are conducted to select the number of iter-
ative InvSRT iterations in each PowerMethod iteration, for 𝑙𝑃= 4 and 
𝑙𝑃= 14 (see Fig. 2). Consequently, we manage to employ an average of 
14.5 iterative InvSRT iterations per PowerMethod iteration for 𝑙𝑃= 4, 
and an average of 13.8 iterative InvSRT iterations per PowerMethod 
iteration for 𝑙𝑃= 14.
The vector normalization strategy in the work of Panda is ﬁxed with 
an evaluation interval of [0.001, 750] and a linear initial approximation 
function of 𝑦 = −0.00019703𝑥 + 0.14777278 for the iterative InvSRT. 
Only 6 iterations of InvSRT are employed in each PowerMethod it-
eration. If we evaluate the eﬀectiveness of their vector normalization 
strategy using the PowerMethod Simulation we employ in Lazy Normal-
ization, their strategy only accommodates 4 PowerMethod iterations for 
an error bound of 1𝑒 −2 involving covariance matrix transformations 
with a contraction coeﬃcient of 1. Note that the dataset pre-scaling in 
the work by Panda is set diﬀerently based on the size of the samples 
in the datasets in order to match the ﬁxed evaluation interval of vector 
normalization. However, such an approach is impractical in real-world

--- Page 16 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
16
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Table 4
Performance Comparison between privacy-preserving PCA algorithms in Panda (2021) and 
Ours under interactive modulus refresh strategy. 𝑙𝐸denotes the desired number of principal 
components, 𝑙𝑃represents the number of iterations for the PowerMethod, 𝑙𝑁represents the 
average number of iterative InvSRT, 𝐿𝑣𝑠∕𝑃𝑀represents the average modulus levels con-
sumed per PowerMethod iteration, and 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒denotes the time for the entire computation, 
where our approach’s time consists of two parts: the computation time of the covariance 
matrix (left) and the computation of principal components, i.e., the PowerMethod and 
EigenShift algorithms (right).
Scheme
DataSet
𝑠
𝑙𝐸
𝑙𝑃
𝑙𝑁
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(min)
𝑅2(𝑉)
Lvs/PM
(Panda, 2021)
MNIST
200
4
4
6
5.21
0.047
77
Ours
MNIST
200
4
4
14.5
0.56+2.16
0.174
61
(Panda, 2021)
MNIST
200
4
14
6
18.42
0.392
77
Ours
MNIST
200
4
14
13.8
0.58+8.41
0.388
54
(Panda, 2021)
MNIST
60000
8
14
6
1628
0.445
77
Ours
MNIST
60000
8
14
13.8
45+14
0.641
54
(Panda, 2021)
F-MNIST
200
4
4
6
5.3
0.600
77
Ours
F-MNIST
200
4
4
14.5
0.58 + 2.23
0.633
61
(Panda, 2021)
F-MNIST
60000
8
14
6
1628
0.626
77
Ours
F-MNIST
60000
8
14
13.8
45 + 14
0.911
54
(Panda, 2021)
Yale
165
6
14
6
27.5
0.715
77
Ours
Yale
165
6
14
13.8
0.62 + 11
0.744
54
scenarios where the user with little knowledge about the internal detail 
of the algorithm may perform the pre-scaling inappropriately, posing a 
high probability of overﬂow (or underﬂow).
To make a fair comparison with our vector normalization approach, 
we ﬁx the dataset scaling factor as 1∕255 for the work by Panda in our 
experiment instead of changing it across diﬀerent datasets. This choice 
is close to the scaling factor used in their experiments on the Fashion 
MNIST dataset with 200 samples.
7.2.3. Performance comparison
Based on the aforementioned experimental setup, we conduct our 
privacy-preserving PCA algorithm and compare its performance with 
the previous work of Panda. (Panda, 2021). Table 4 presents the per-
formance of our privacy-preserving PCA algorithm and the algorithm 
proposed in Panda (2021)., both using the interactive modulus refresh 
strategy.
Eﬃciency and scalability
We can observe that for the same number 
of principal components and PowerMethod iterations, our algorithm is 
approximately 1.9 times faster in terms of the overall runtime. Specif-
ically, our PowerMethod runs at a speed of approximately 8.2 seconds 
per iteration, which is around 2.3 times faster than the 19.6 seconds 
reported by Panda per iteration. This notable improvement can be at-
tributed to a lower number of ciphertext rotations achieved by our 
PowerMethod (see Theorem 5) compared to their reported complex-
ity of 𝑂(𝑙𝑃⋅(2 log𝑑⋅
𝑠⋅𝑑
𝑁∕2 + log 𝑁∕2
𝑑)) (where 𝑠remains the number of 
samples and 𝑑the number of features). This advantage becomes more 
apparent when dealing with larger sample sizes. As an example, we are 
able to compute the top 8 eigenvectors of a dataset with 60,000 sam-
ples in approximately 1 hour using 7 threads, which is estimated to be 
roughly 25 times faster than the work by Panda using the same number 
of threads. This underscores the scalability of our approach: When faced 
with datasets containing a large number of samples, the complexity of 
our solution primarily concentrates on homomorphic covariance ma-
trix computation, a one-time operation. The existence of the covariance 
matrix enables the subsequent PowerMethod execution time entirely in-
dependent of the number of samples, which implies that the user may 
apply more rounds of PowerMethod to the computed principal compo-
nents at any time if he or she is unsatisﬁed with the precision of the 
principal components. Furthermore, it is worth noting that if a user 
wishes to augment the dataset with new samples and compute the prin-
cipal components of the new dataset using privacy-preserving PCA, the 
complexity of this operation is also independent of the original dataset 
size. This is because, for any dataset 𝑋, we can easily generate the new 
covariance matrix by aggregating the precomputed covariance matrix 
of the original and the one generated by the new samples with equa-
tion 𝐶𝑜𝑣′ = 1∕(|𝑋| + |𝑋′|) ⋅(𝑋𝑇𝑋+ 𝑋′𝑇𝑋′) −𝜇′𝜇′𝑇, where 𝑋′ is the 
set consists of all new samples and 𝜇′ is the average vector of the whole 
dataset.
Accuracy
Enhancements in 𝑅2(𝑉) accuracy are recorded in MNIST 
and FMNIST datasets, each containing 60000 samples. This improve-
ment is attributed to a speciﬁc factor: The approximate eigenvector in 
each PowerMethod iteration has a higher probability of being precisely 
normalized due to our larger evaluation interval for vector normal-
ization (encompassing the maximum input value and a closer-to-zero 
left boundary) and more rounds of iterative InvSRT, compared to the 
approach employed by Panda. On the other hand, no discernible en-
hancements in accuracy are observed in experiments on YALE (165 
samples), Fashion-MNIST (200 samples), and MNIST (200 samples, 14 
PowerMethod iterations), implying situations that the inputs of vector 
normalization happen to fall into the intersection of the evaluation in-
tervals prepared by both Panda and our scheme.
From a diﬀerent perspective, the variations in accuracy among dif-
ferent datasets mainly stem from the inherent distribution of eigenval-
ues in each dataset (von Mises and Pollaczek-Geiringer, 1929). Specif-
ically, the Fashion MNIST dataset exhibits higher accuracy due to the 
relatively larger diﬀerences among its dominant eigenvalues. For ex-
ample, its eight dominant eigenvalues are [6.50301, 4.06187, 1.39494, 
1.13345, 0.93763, 0.81907, 0.49591, 0.45021] compared to those with 
smaller diﬀerences in the MNIST dataset, namely [1.80816, 1.24723, 
1.08723, 0.98732, 0.85060, 0.74359, 0.63526, 0.57545].
Modulus utilization
Additionally, our modulus utilization is higher than 
the approach proposed by Panda. For a total of 4 PowerMethod itera-
tions, our approach requires an average of 61 modulus levels for each 
PowerMethod iteration with an average of 14.5 iterative InvSRT iter-
ations, while their approach requires an average of 77 modulus levels 
to complete one PowerMethod iteration with only 6 iterative InvSRT 
iterations. This discrepancy arises due to two factors: (i) We compos-
ite two iterative InvSRT iterations into one and employ more ciphertext 
multiplications to save 1 modulus level per iterative InvSRT iteration. 
(ii) their PowerMethod implementation has a multiplication depth that 
is dependent on the dataset’s number of features. In contrast, our ap-
proach’s multiplication depth is independent of the dataset’s features. 
As a result, we have more ﬂexibility in performing additional rounds of 
the iterative InvSRT algorithm to achieve a more accurate vector nor-
malization.

--- Page 17 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
17
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
8. Conclusion and further discussion
In this paper, we have presented a novel and eﬃcient privacy-
preserving PCA scheme using homomorphic in the context of cloud 
computing, which has addressed several challenges presented in pre-
vious approaches. Firstly, we have successfully tackled the obstacle of 
homomorphically computing the covariance matrix, a limitation in pre-
vious methods. This is achieved by designing an eﬃcient homomorphic 
covariance calculation algorithm, leveraging our optimized matrix mul-
tiplication as a core component, and utilizing parallel computations of 
multiple matrix multiplication instances to enhance speed. Secondly, we 
have introduced an eﬃcient homomorphic circuit for the PowerMethod 
algorithm, which incorporates a universal vector normalization strategy 
to address the issue of potential accuracy loss. The experimental results 
demonstrate that our approach surpasses state-of-the-art methods, of-
fering reduced runtime, improved accuracy, and enhanced scalability.
There are several topics for further discussion, including but not 
limited to:
1. A signiﬁcant portion of the complexity in homomorphic matrix 
multiplication comes from row and column transformations. Re-
cent work by Jang et al. introduced optimizations for matrix mul-
tiplication that eﬀectively reduce the complexity of these trans-
formations (Jang et al., 2022). Their optimizations could be com-
plementary to ours, and combining them may lead to even better 
performance.
2. The performance of PowerMethod depends on the characteristics 
of the dataset itself, especially the distribution of eigenvalues. If 
the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix are close to each other, 
the accuracy of PowerMethod may be reduced (von Mises and 
Pollaczek-Geiringer, 1929). It may be worth considering alterna-
tive PCA algorithms to achieve more accurate results. Notably, our 
homomorphic covariance matrix computation algorithm can serve 
as a black box function for alternative privacy-preserving PCA al-
gorithm design.
3. Our proposed solution can serve as a candidate for multi-party 
privacy-preserving PCA. Speciﬁcally, our approach can be migrated 
to multi-party homomorphic encryption such as the work proposed 
by Mouchet et al. (2021) and provide possible solutions for both 
vertical and horizontal federated privacy-preserving PCA scenar-
ios.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the National Key Research and Devel-
opment Program of China 2021YFF0704102, and the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (62076125).
Appendix A. Detailed information of full-RNS CKKS scheme
We use Φ𝑀(𝑋) to denote the 𝑀-th cyclotomic polynomial and 
denote its 𝑁= 𝜑(𝑀) roots as 𝜁1, 𝜁3, … , 𝜁𝜑(𝑀), where 𝜁𝑖= 𝜁𝑖
1. The sym-
bol 𝑅represents the cyclotomic polynomial ring ℤ[𝑋]∕Φ𝑀(𝑋). Let 
𝑄𝐿= 𝑞0 × 𝑞1 × ⋯ × 𝑞𝐿be the product of prime numbers 𝑞𝑖. The el-
ements in ring 𝑅𝑄𝐿can be uniquely represented in the RNS ﬁeld as 
𝑅𝑞0 × 𝑅𝑞1 × ⋯ × 𝑅𝑞𝐿≅𝑅𝑄𝐿. The introduction of full-RNS CKKS can be 
divided into the following four modules.
A.1. General module
This module includes the parameterization for full-RNS CKKS, the 
encoding method to convert a complex vector to a native plaintext form, 
the encryption method to convert plaintext to ciphertext, as well as the 
key switching technique to change the decryption key associated with 
a speciﬁc ciphertext.
Parameter Generation Setparams(𝑁, 𝑏, 𝜎) sets 𝑀= 2𝑁and selects the 
𝑀-th cyclotomic polynomial Φ𝑀(𝑋) = 𝑋𝑁+1. Two sets of prime num-
bers {𝑞𝑖|𝑖 = 0, … , 𝐿} and {𝑝𝑖|𝑖 = 0, … , 𝛼−1} are chosen such that their 
products are at most 𝑏bits. These primes satisfy 𝑞𝑖,𝑝𝑖≡1 mod 2𝑁. Let 
𝑄𝐿= ∏𝐿
𝑖=0 𝑞𝑖and 𝑃= ∏𝛼
𝑖=0 𝑝𝑖. The ring 𝑅𝑄𝐿= ℤ[𝑋]𝑄𝐿∕Φ𝑀(𝑋) is re-
ferred to as the plaintext space of the CKKS scheme. The distribution 
over 𝑅for generating the secret key is denoted as 𝑅 ←𝜒𝑠, and the error 
distribution over 𝑅as 𝑅 ←𝜒𝑒, which is a truncated discrete Gaussian 
distribution with standard deviation 𝜎.
Encoding: Encode(𝐳, Δ, 𝑛, 𝓁) takes a message vector 𝐳∈ℂ𝑛, where 1 ≤
𝑛 < 𝑁and 𝑛divides 𝑁, and converts it to a plaintext polynomial 𝑚 ∈
𝑅𝑄𝓁. To prevent a signiﬁcant precision loss in the conversion, a scaling 
factor Δ is applied to the message. For any plaintext in 𝑅𝑄𝓁, denote 𝓁
as its modulus level.
Decoding: Decode(𝑚, Δ, 𝑛, 𝓁) takes a plaintext polynomial 𝑚 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁as 
input and converts it to a message vector 𝐳∈ℂ𝑛, where 1 ≤𝑛 < 𝑁and 
𝑛divides 𝑁. The decoding process is the inverse operation of encoding.
Secret Key Generation: SecKeyGen(⋅) samples 𝑠 ←𝜒𝑠and outputs the 
secret key 𝑠.
Public Key Generation: PubKeyGen(𝑠) samples 𝑒 ←𝜒𝑒and 𝑎 ∈𝑢𝑅𝑄𝐿, 
and outputs (−𝑎𝑠 + 𝑒, 𝑎).
Encryption: Enc(𝑚, 𝑝𝑘) takes a plaintext polynomial 𝑚 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁and 
a public key 𝑝𝑘 ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝐿as input. It samples 𝑎 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁and outputs 
(𝑎 ⋅𝑝𝑘0, 𝑎 ⋅𝑝𝑘1) + (𝑚 + 𝑒0, 𝑒1) ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁as a ciphertext encrypting 𝑚. For 
any ciphertext in 𝑅2
𝑄𝓁, denote 𝓁as its own modulus level.
Decryption: Dec(𝑐, 𝑠𝑘) takes a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑞and a secret key 𝑠𝑘
as input and outputs a plaintext polynomial 𝑚′ ∈𝑅. It computes and 
outputs 𝑚′ = 𝑐0 + 𝑐1 ⋅𝑠𝑘 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁.
Switch Key Generation: SwitchKeyGen(𝑠, 𝑠′, 𝐛) for 𝐛 ∈ℤ𝛽a vector 
representation of a certain integer decomposition basis, SwitchKeyGen
takes in 𝑠, 𝑠′ and outputs a vector as the switching key: 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠′ =
(𝑠𝑤𝑘(0)
𝑠,𝑠′, … , 𝑠𝑤𝑘(𝛽−1)
𝑠,𝑠′
) where 𝑠𝑤𝑘(𝑖)
𝑠,𝑠′ ∈𝑅2
𝑃𝑄𝐿.
Key Switching: KeySwitch(𝑐, 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠′) takes a polynomial 𝑐= (𝑎, 𝑏) ∈
𝑅2
𝑄𝓁and a switching key 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠′ as input. It ﬁrst decomposes 𝑎with 
respect to the decomposition basis 𝐛of 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠′, i.e., 𝑎 = ⟨𝐚,𝐛⟩. Then, it 
computes and returns (𝑎0, 𝑎1) = ⌊𝑃−1 ⋅⟨𝐚,𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠′
⟩⌉mod 𝑄𝓁.
A.2. Addition module
This part introduces the function provided by full-RNS CKKS to 
achieve homomorphic addition between ciphertexts, which induces the 
underlying plaintexts to perform Hadamard addition.
Plaintext Addition: PAdd(𝑐, 𝑚) takes a plaintext polynomial 𝑚 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁
and a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁as input, both having the same scaling factor. 
It outputs a ciphertext 𝑐′ = 𝑐+ (𝑚, 0).
Ciphertext Addition: Add(𝑐1, 𝑐2) takes two ciphertexts 𝑐1, 𝑐2 ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁
with the same scaling factor as input and outputs 𝑐1 + 𝑐2.
A.3. Multiplication module
The multiplication module contains the functions to achieve ho-
momorphic multiplication among ciphertexts and plaintexts, which in-
duces the underlying plaintexts to perform the Hadamard product.
Plaintext Multiplication: PMult(𝑐, 𝑚): Given a plaintext polynomial 
𝑚 ∈𝑅𝑄𝓁and a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁with scaling factors Δ and Δ′ respec-
tively, compute and return 𝑐′ = (𝑐0 ⋅𝑚, 𝑐1 ⋅𝑚). The resulting ciphertext 
𝑐′ has a scaling factor of ΔΔ′.

--- Page 18 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
18
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
Fig. 3. Flow chart of the modulus refresh strategy in homomorphic PowerMethod.
Ciphertext Multiplication: Mult(𝑐1, 𝑐2): For ciphertexts 𝑐and 𝑐′ with 
scaling factors Δ and Δ′ respectively, compute (𝑑0, 𝑑1, 𝑑2) = (𝑐0𝑐′
0, 𝑐0𝑐′
1+
𝑐1𝑐′
0, 𝑐1𝑐′
1) and return 𝑑= (𝑑0, 𝑑1) + SwitchKey(𝑑2, rlk) ∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁as the re-
sulting ciphertext, where rlk is a switching key 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠2. The resulting 
ciphertext 𝑑has a scaling factor of ΔΔ′.
A rescale operation is commonly used to transfer a ciphertext from 
a ring with a large modulus to a ring with a smaller modulus, reducing 
the expansive scaling factor in the ciphertext and limiting the error 
introduced by multiplications.
Rescaling: Rescale(𝑐): For a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁with scaling factor Δ, 
return ⌊𝑞−1
𝓁⋅𝑐⌉. The resulting ciphertext has a scaling factor of Δ∕𝑞𝓁.
Bootstrapping: Bootstrap(𝑐): Bring a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁
back to 
𝑅2
𝑄𝐿−𝑘, where 𝑘is the multiplication depth of the bootstrapping cir-
cuit.
A.4. Rotation module
The rotation module includes the functions to achieve homomorphic 
position shifting in a ciphertext. Speciﬁcally, full-RNS CKKS allows us 
to homomorphically rotate the position of the components of the un-
derlying plain complex vector in a ciphertext.
Rotation: Rot(𝑐1, 𝑘): Given a ciphertext 𝑐∈𝑅2
𝑄𝓁and a rotation key 
rtk𝑘, compute and output (𝑐5𝑘
0 , 0) + SwitchKey(𝑐5𝑘
1 , rot𝑘), where rot is a 
switching key 𝑠𝑤𝑘𝑠,𝑠5𝑘. This ciphertext represents the result of rotating 
all components of the message vector 𝐳∈ℂ𝑁∕2 encrypted by 𝑐to the 
left by 𝑖steps (or positions), denoted as 𝐳′ = 𝜌(𝐳; 𝑖).
Appendix B. Proofs for the vector normalization strategy
B.1. Ampliﬁcation upper bound of the shifted covariance
Theorem 7. For the 1-shifted covariance variance matrix Σ′ = Σ −𝜆𝐯𝐯𝑇
of the covariance matrix Σ, where 𝐯is the normalized approximate domi-
nant eigenvector of Σ obtained using the PowerMethod, and 𝜆 = ⟨Σ𝐯,𝐯⟩
⟨𝐯,𝐯⟩, the 
matrices Σ′ and Σ have the same scaling upper bound. In other words, the 
ampliﬁcation eﬀect of the transformation Σ′ on a vector does not exceed the 
ampliﬁcation eﬀect of the transformation Σ on the same vector.
Proof. Let the covariance matrix have 𝑛eigenvectors: 𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑛, 
corresponding to eigenvalues 𝜆1, 𝜆2, … , 𝜆𝑛. We only need to prove that 
𝜆 ≤𝜆1. When 𝐯is equal to 𝐱1, the inequality is obviously true. When 𝐯
is not equal to 𝐱1, it can be represented as 𝐯 = 𝑐1𝐱1 + 𝑐2𝐱2 + ⋯ + 𝑐𝑛𝐱𝑛, 
where 𝑐2
1 + 𝑐2
2 + ⋯ + 𝑐2
𝑛= 1. In this case, ⟨Σ𝐯,𝐯⟩= 𝜆1𝑐2
1 + 𝜆2𝑐2
2 + ⋯ +
𝜆𝑛𝑐2
𝑛≤𝜆1(𝑐2
1 +⋯ +𝑐2
𝑛) = 𝜆1, while ⟨𝐯,𝐯⟩is always equal to 1. Therefore, 
𝜆 ≤𝜆1 holds true.
□
B.2. Proof of eﬀectiveness for the PowerMethod simulation
Theorem 8. If a speciﬁc instance of the Lazy Normalization strategy can 
maintain an error bound of 𝑒under a PowerMethod simulation with a Con-
traction Coeﬃcient of 𝑆for 𝑡iterations, then for any covariance matrix with 
eigenvalues all greater than 𝑆, this instance guarantees that the length of the 
output approximate eigenvector within 𝑡PowerMethod iterations is close to 
1 with an error no bigger than 𝑒.
Proof. We need to prove that the scaling eﬀect of the covariance matrix 
transformation on any vector 𝐯with a length of 1 is not smaller than its 
minimum eigenvalue 𝜆𝑛. Let 𝜆1, 𝜆2, … , 𝜆𝑛represent the eigenvalues of 
Σ arranged in descending order, and 𝐱1, … , 𝐱𝑛be their corresponding 
eigenvectors. It is known that 𝐯can be expressed as: 𝐯 = 𝑐1𝐱1 + 𝑐2𝐱2 +
⋯ + 𝑐𝑛𝐱𝑛, where 𝑐2
1 + 𝑐2
2 + ⋯ + 𝑐2
𝑛= 1. Then ||Σ𝐯||2
2 = 𝜆2
1𝑐2
1 + ⋯ + 𝜆2
𝑛𝑐2
𝑛≥
𝜆2
𝑛(𝑐2
1 + ⋯ + 𝑐2
𝑛) = 𝜆𝑛.
□
Appendix C. Modulus refresh timing in the privacy-preserving 
PCA algorithm
No modulus refresh operations are necessary during the computa-
tion of the covariance matrix, as its multiplication depth can be handled 
easily within concrete CKKS schemes. Regarding the PowerMethod, 
the timing of modulus refresh operations is illustrated in Flowchart 
in Fig. 3. As depicted in the ﬂowchart, we avoid performing modulus 
refresh during the covariance matrix transformation because doing so 
would increase the frequency of modulus refreshes proportional to the 
size of the covariance matrix. Instead, we only refresh some interme-
diate values or the approximate eigenvector. Speciﬁcally, we manage 
to perform modulus refresh only once when refreshing the approxi-
mate eigenvector. This is achieved by extracting the components of

--- Page 19 ---
Computers & Security 138 (2024) 103658
19
X. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Jiang et al.
the approximate eigenvector distributed across diﬀerent ciphertexts and 
encoding them into a single ciphertext. After the refresh, the com-
ponents can be re-distributed into diﬀerent ciphertexts. This strategy 
eﬀectively decouples the number of modulus refreshes from the num-
ber of vector components. In addition, it is worth noting that the cloud 
users in our scheme are not involved in any aspect of the privacy-
preserving PCA algorithm, apart from encryption and decryption op-
erations. Unlike previous approaches that require user participation in 
the privacy-preserving algorithmic process (Rathee et al., 2018), (Lu 
et al., 2016), our scheme not only safeguards the algorithm privacy of 
the cloud service provider but also minimizes the coupling between the 
privacy-preserving PCA algorithm and the design of the communication 
protocol between the cloud and the user.
References
Arnold, David, Saniie, Jafar, 2023. Evaluation of homomorphic encryption for privacy 
in principal component analysis. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Electro 
Information Technology (eIT). IEEE, pp. 284–288.
Belhumeur, Peter N., Hespanha, Joao P., Kriegman, David J., 1997. Eigenfaces vs. ﬁsh-
erfaces: recognition using class speciﬁc linear projection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. 
Mach. Intell. 19 (7), 711–720.
Bossuat, Jean-Philippe, Mouchet, Christian, Troncoso-Pastoriza, Juan, Hubaux, Jean-
Pierre, 2021. Eﬃcient bootstrapping for approximate homomorphic encryption with 
non-sparse keys. In: Advances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2021: 40th Annual Inter-
national Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. 
Zagreb, Croatia, October 17–21, 2021. In: Proceedings, Part I. Springer, pp. 587–617.
Brakerski, Zvika, Gentry, Craig, Vaikuntanathan, Vinod, 2014. (leveled) fully homomor-
phic encryption without bootstrapping. ACM Trans. Comput. Theory 6 (3), 1–36.
Cheon, Jung Hee, Kim, Andrey, Kim, Miran, Song, Yongsoo, 2017. Homomorphic encryp-
tion for arithmetic of approximate numbers. In: Advances in Cryptology–ASIACRYPT 
2017: 23rd International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptology 
and Information Security. Hong Kong, China, December 3–7, 2017. In: Proceedings, 
Part I, vol. 23. Springer, pp. 409–437.
Cheon, Jung Hee, Han, Kyoohyung, Kim, Andrey, Kim, Miran, Song, Yongsoo, 2019. 
A full rns variant of approximate homomorphic encryption. In: Selected Areas in 
Cryptography–SAC 2018: 25th International Conference. Calgary, AB, Canada, Au-
gust 15–17, 2018. In: Revised Selected Papers, vol. 25. Springer, pp. 347–368.
Deng, Li, 2012. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning 
research. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 29 (6), 141–142.
Duong, Dung Hoang, Kumar Mishra, Pradeep, Yasuda, Masaya, 2016. Eﬃcient secure ma-
trix multiplication over lwe-based homomorphic encryption. Tatra Mt. Math. Publ. 67 
(1), 69–83.
Fan, Junfeng, Vercauteren, Frederik, 2012. Somewhat practical fully homomorphic en-
cryption. Cryptology ePrint Archive.
Froelicher, David, Cho, Hyunghoon, Edupalli, Manaswitha, Sa Sousa, Joao, Bossuat, Jean-
Philippe, Pyrgelis, Apostolos, Troncoso-Pastoriza, Juan R., Berger, Bonnie, Hubaux, 
Jean-Pierre, 2023. Scalable and privacy-preserving federated principal component 
analysis. arXiv preprint, arXiv :2304 .00129.
Gizem, S. Cetin, Doroz, Yarkin, Sunar, Berk, Martin, William J., 2015. Arithmetic using 
word-wise homomorphic encryption. Cryptology ePrint Archive.
Halevi, Shai, Shoup, Victor, 2014. Algorithms in helib. In: Advances in Cryptology–
CRYPTO 2014: 34th Annual Cryptology Conference. Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 
17–21, 2014. In: Proceedings, Part I, vol. 34. Springer, pp. 554–571.
Halevi, Shai, Shoup, Victor, 2018. Faster homomorphic linear transformations in helib. 
In: Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2018: 38th Annual International Cryptology 
Conference. Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 19–23, 2018. In: Proceedings, Part I, 
vol. 38. Springer, pp. 93–120.
Hotelling, Harold, 1933. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal com-
ponents. J. Educ. Psychol. 24 (6), 417.
Jang, Jaehee, Lee, Younho, Kim, Andrey, Na, Byunggook, Yhee, Donggeon, Lee, Byoung-
han, Hee Cheon, Jung, Yoon, Sungroh, 2022. Privacy-preserving deep sequential 
model with matrix homomorphic encryption. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM on 
Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 377–391.
Jiang, Xiaoqian, Kim, Miran, Lauter, Kristin, Song, Yongsoo, 2018. Secure out-
sourced matrix computation and application to neural networks. In: Proceedings 
of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 
pp. 1209–1222.
Lattigo v4, Online: https://github .com /tuneinsight /lattigo. EPFL-LDS, Tune Insight SA.
Liu, Yingting, Chen, Chaochao, Zheng, Longfei, Wang, Li, Zhou, Jun, Liu, Guiquan, Yang, 
Shuang, 2020. Privacy preserving pca for multiparty modeling. arXiv preprint. arXiv :
2002 .02091.
Lu, Wen-jie, Kawasaki, Shohei, Sakuma, Jun, 2016. Using fully homomorphic encryption 
for statistical analysis of categorical, ordinal and numerical data. Cryptology ePrint 
Archive.
Lyubashevsky, Vadim, Peikert, Chris, Regev, Oded, 2010. On ideal lattices and learning 
with errors over rings. In: Advances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2010: 29th Annual 
International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Tech-
niques. French Riviera, May 30–June 3, 2010. In: Proceedings, vol. 29. Springer, 
pp. 1–23.
Ma, Xirong, 2023. Buﬀaloheextension. https://github .com /lilBuﬀaloEric /BuﬀaloHE _
extension.
Mishra, Pradeep Kumar, Rathee, Deevashwer, Hoang Duong, Dung, Yasuda, Masaya, 
2021. Fast secure matrix multiplications over ring-based homomorphic encryption. 
Inf. Secur. J. Glob. Perspect. 30 (4), 219–234.
Mouchet, Christian, Troncoso-Pastoriza, Juan, Bossuat, Jean-Philippe, Hubaux, Jean-
Pierre, 2021. Multiparty homomorphic encryption from ring-learning-with-errors. In: 
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. 2021(CONF), pp. 291–311.
Panda, Samanvaya, 2021. Principal component analysis using ckks homomorphic scheme. 
In: Cyber Security Cryptography and Machine Learning: 5th International Sympo-
sium. CSCML 2021, Be’er Sheva, Israel, July 8–9, 2021. In: Proceedings, vol. 5. 
Springer, pp. 52–70.
Panda, Samanvaya, 2022. Polynomial approximation of inverse sqrt function for fhe. 
In: Cyber Security, Cryptology, and Machine Learning: 6th International Sympo-
sium, Proceedings. CSCML 2022, Be’er Sheva, Israel, June 30–July 1, 2022. Springer, 
pp. 366–376.
Pearson, Karl, 1901. Liii. on lines and planes of closest ﬁt to systems of points in space. 
Lond. Edinb. Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 2 (11), 559–572.
Qu, Hongyuan, Xu, Guangwu. Improvements of homomorphic evaluation of inverse 
square root. Available at SSRN 4258571.
Rathee, Deevashwer, Kumar Mishra, Pradeep, Yasuda, Masaya, 2018. Faster pca and lin-
ear regression through hypercubes in helib. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on 
Privacy in the Electronic Society, pp. 42–53.
von Mises, Richard, Pollaczek-Geiringer, Hilda, 1929. Praktische verfahren der gle-
ichungsauﬂösung. Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 9, 152–164.
Wang, Shufang, Huang, Hai, 2019. Secure outsourced computation of multiple matrix 
multiplication based on fully homomorphic encryption. KSII Trans. Int. Inf. Syst. 13 
(11), 5616–5630.
Xiao, Han, Rasul, Kashif, Vollgraf, Roland, 2017. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for 
benchmarking machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint. arXiv :1708 .07747.
Xirong Ma is currently pursuing his bachelor’s degree at the School of Software 
Engineering, Shandong University, starting from 2020. His research interests include 
privacy-preserving computation, homomorphic encryption, and machine learning.
Chuan Ma received the B.S. degree from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-
munications, Beijing, China, in 2013 and Ph.D. degree from the University of Sydney, 
Australia, in 2018. From 2018 to 2022, he worked as a lecturer in the Nanjing University 
of Science and Technology, and now he is a principal investigator at Zhejiang Lab. He has 
published more than 40 journal and conference papers, including a best paper in WCNC 
2018, and a best paper award in IEEE Signal Processing Society 2022. His research in-
terests include stochastic geometry, wireless caching networks and distributed machine 
learning, and now focuses on the big data analysis and privacy-preserving.
Yali Jiang is currently a Lecturer in the School of Software, Shandong University. 
She received her B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from Shandong University in 1999, 2002, 
and 2011, respectively. She is engaged in research in the ﬁeld of information security and 
cryptography. Her main research areas focus on privacy-preserving technologies based 
on cryptography, including Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE), Secure Multi-Party 
Computation (MPC), Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP), and more. She has participated in 
the National Key R&D Programs of China, the Shandong Provincial Key Research and 
Development Programs, the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, and joint 
research projects with enterprises.
Chunpeng Ge is currently a full professor at the School of Software, Shandong Uni-
versity. His current research interests include information security and privacy-preserving 
for cloud computing, blockchain, security and privacy of AI systems. He has published 
more than 60 papers in prestigious journal and conferences. He served as the editor of 
the journal of CSI and program committee for more than 30 international conferences.
