--- Page 1 ---
Nudge: A Private Recommendations Engine
Alexandra Henzinger
MIT
Emma Dauterman
MIT and Stanford
Henry Corrigan-Gibbs
MIT
Dan Boneh
Stanford
Abstract
Nudge is a recommender system with cryptographic privacy.
A Nudge deployment consists of three infrastructure servers
and many users, who retrieve/rate items from a large data
set (e.g., videos, posts, businesses). Periodically, the Nudge
servers collect ratings from users in secret-shared form, then
run a three-party computation to train a lightweight recom-
mender model on users’ private ratings. Finally, the servers
deliver personalized recommendations to each user. At every
step, Nudge reveals nothing to the servers about any user’s
preferences beyond the aggregate model itself. User privacy
holds against an adversary that compromises the entire secret
state of one server. The technical core of Nudge is a new,
three-party protocol for matrix factorization. On the Netflix
data set with half a million users and ten thousand items,
Nudge (running on three 192-core servers on a local-area
network) privately learns a recommender model in 50 mins
with 40 GB of server-to-server communication. On a standard
quality benchmark (nDCG@20), Nudge scores 0.29 out of
1.0, on par with non-private matrix factorization and just shy
of non-private neural recommenders, which score 0.31.
1
Introduction
Personalized recommendations are ubiquitous, powering ev-
erything from social-media feeds to video-streaming apps.
The data that fuels these recommender algorithms betrays
our every move—our clicks, likes, views, and browsing
behaviors—as well as those of millions of other users. Given
the scale and scope of this data collection, content recommen-
dation services have become focal points of privacy failure:
user data is resold to third parties [15, 151], exploited for
profit [40,49,151], and stolen in data breaches [131].
To protect against such abuses, techniques for privately
fetching content (via anonymizing proxies [18,57] or crypto-
graphic protocols [21,48]) have advanced and seen deploy-
ment, but systems for private recommendation lag behind.
Anonymity-based schemes extended with persistent identi-
fiers to link queries and allow for recommendation break in
the face of de-anonymization attacks [34, 71, 129]. Recom-
menders built on federated learning leak individual users’
data [39,78,112,167] or intermediate model versions [26,119,
120, 143]; others built on trusted hardware [13, 56] are vul-
nerable to side-channel attacks [46,127]. Cryptographically
private recommenders [102,130,133,157] run into a problem
of scale: they operate on at most thousands of users fetching
thousands of items. In sum, existing recommender methods
fall short of offering strong privacy protection at large scale.
This paper presents Nudge, a privacy-protecting recom-
mender system that operates on millions of users or items.
Nudge splits trust across three servers run by independent par-
ties. These servers collect secret-shared logs that encode many
users’ interactions with items from a large data set. In a secure
three-party computation, the Nudge servers then aggregate this
data to synthesize and infer retrieval patterns across queries
and across users: in short, they learn a recommender model.
Finally, the servers send secret-shared yet personalized rec-
ommendations back to each user. All along, Nudge provides
a precise form of cryptographic privacy: even if an adversary
compromises the state of one Nudge server (i.e., semi-honest
security), no party—not the servers, not the users—learns
anything about which user interacted with which item, be-
yond (a) what the aggregate recommender model reveals and
(b) how many interactions each user submitted.
Inspired by non-private [104,145] and private [102,130,133,
157] recommender systems, Nudge generates recommenda-
tions using matrix factorization. Nudge’s core is a co-design of
a matrix-factorization algorithm with multi-party computation
techniques. Whereas prior cryptographic recommender proto-
cols use general-purpose gradient descent [102,130,133,157],
Nudge instead implements the classic power-iteration algo-
rithm [123] that extracts the top eigenvectors of a matrix in a
sequence of algebraic steps. Using this new three-party pro-
tocol, Nudge factors matrices with tens of billions of entries
(e.g., a Yelp data set) in hours of wall-clock time.
Our techniques. We show that power iteration fits into a class
of algorithms efficiently computable in a three-party setting.

--- Page 2 ---
This is because it alternates between two steps: (a) applying a
secret-shared matrix to a secret-shared vector and (b) evaluat-
ing simple, non-linear functions on the intermediate results.
Replicated secret sharing [20,125] lets three parties execute
step (a) non-interactively and at high speed, while function
secret sharing [32,33] makes it possible to run step (b) with
low communication costs. By casting matrix factorization in
this high-level framework, we ensure that the communication
between servers scales linearly with the number of users and
items—unlike prior cryptographic recommender protocols
with up to three parties [102,130,133].
Along the way, we contribute special-purpose three-party
protocols for the non-linear functions that Nudge relies on:
truncation and normalization. Building on a rich literature in
privacy-preserving machine learning [31,38,96,141,154,158,
160], we improve the efficiency of these protocols in Nudge’s
three-party setting: e.g., reducing the communication by 6×
over state-of-the-art truncation [96].
Evaluation. We implement Nudge in Go and C. Nudge runs
faster than prior recommender systems with cryptographic
privacy: it outperforms two-party approaches based on gar-
bled circuits by four orders of magnitude in communication
and compute [130,133], and runs faster than a bespoke four-
party computation while using 8× less communication and
one fewer non-colluding party [157].
We evaluate both Nudge’s performance and quality on the
Netflix prize data set with half a million users and tens of thou-
sands of items [7]. Running on three 192-core machines on
a local-area network, Nudge privately learns a recommender
model in 50 min and 40 GB of server-to-server communica-
tion. After learning the recommendation model, each Nudge
server can serve secret-shared recommendations to a user in
hundreds of kilobytes of communication (298 KB on Netflix)
and seconds of latency (0.38 s on Netflix). Nudge’s resulting
recommendations match those of cleartext matrix factoriza-
tion in recall and rank-based metrics: on a standard qual-
ity benchmark (nDCG@20), Nudge and non-private matrix-
factorization systems both score 0.29 out of 1.0, just shy of
non-private deep neural recommenders, which score 0.31.
Moreover, Nudge can scale larger yet: on a Criteo data
set with millions of users and hundreds of ad campaigns [6],
Nudge’s private matrix factorization takes 1.5 h and 124 GB
of server-to-server communication. On a Yelp data set with
hundreds of thousands of users and hundreds of thousands of
businesses [8], Nudge takes 8 h and 250 GB.
Extensions. Finally, we propose a number of extensions that
enhance Nudge’s performance, security guarantees, and func-
tionality. To scale larger yet, we show how to compose Nudge
with classic dimensionality-reduction techniques [97, 136].
To complement its privacy protections, Nudge integrates with
well-studied mechanisms that make the model and the rec-
ommendations that it outputs differentially private [60,122].
To defend against disruptions by malicious users, the Nudge
servers run a lightweight, one-time well-formedness check
on all user submissions, in a way that is almost free in our
three-party setting [10,51].
Lastly, while we present Nudge as a recommender system,
algorithms for computing the top eigenvectors of a matrix
form the backbone of a wide array of unsupervised learn-
ing and data-mining tasks [88].
Our new private power-
iteration routine can extend to these same applications: prin-
cipal component analysis [75], learning low-dimensional em-
beddings [30,55,136], link analysis using PageRank [82,135],
graph analysis and spectral clustering [111], and data compres-
sion [94,99]. Nudge shows the possibility of performing these
tasks on large secret-shared matrices, data sets, or graphs—
without letting any party see the underlying data.
Limitations. Nudge comes with three main limitations. First,
Nudge requires three servers and tolerates the semi-honest
compromise of one. Second, Nudge’s goal is to map user
ratings into personalized recommendations; it relies on other
means (e.g., Apple’s private relay [18], Tor [57], or crypto-
graphic private information retrieval [48]) to let users fetch
data items in a private way.
Finally, Nudge’s privacy property guarantees that no party
learns anything more about users’ behaviors than the final,
aggregate recommender model encodes. As is inherent in any
collaborative-filtering system, where users’ inputs influence
other users’ outputs, the recommender model produced by
Nudge reveals some information about user behaviors in a
way that we precisely define in Section 3. As a standard (if
imperfect) mitigation, we show how to make Nudge’s rec-
ommender model and recommendations differentially private
with respect to any user’s data [60,122].
2
Background: Matrix factorization
The goal of a recommender system is to give users recommen-
dations for items. On a content-delivery website, items could
be content to fetch; on a social network, items could be posts;
on a restaurant-review app, items could be restaurants.
At the start of the recommendation process, each user holds
ratings for a subset of the items. The interpretation of these
ratings depends on the application: e.g., on a news site, a
user’s rating for item 푖could be “1” if the user has viewed
article 푖, and “0” otherwise. For a restaurant-review app, the
rating could be the user’s 1–5 “star” rating for each restaurant.
A recommender system has two steps: training and serving
recommendations. Training executes periodically; some fast-
moving applications (e.g., Facebook ads [90]) retrain daily,
while others (e.g., Spotify [62], VertexAI’s recommenders for
commerce [9]) retrain weekly. The resulting recommenda-
tions may be pushed to users’ devices once training completes.
Matrix factorization. The algorithm at the core of our private
recommender system is matrix factorization, which has been
a key part of recommendation engines used at Netflix [104],

--- Page 3 ---
Yelp [25], Twitter [4], Spotify [3], and YouTube [52]. At the
highest level, the matrix-factorization technique aims to ex-
plain users’ ratings on a large collection of items by extracting
a small number of latent “factors” that model each user and
each item and capture the relationships between them [83].
The version of matrix factorization that we use is closely re-
lated to truncated singular value decomposition.
Even as neural-network-based recommenders grow popu-
lar [52,89,161], in many settings well-tuned matrix factoriza-
tion techniques can still provide comparable quality and are ap-
pealingly simple, robust, and cheap to deploy [16,68,144,145].
Training input: A matrix-factorization-based recommender
system takes as input a user-item-interaction matrix U ∈R푚×푛,
where 푚is the number of users, 푛is the number of items, and
the entry at position (푖, 푗) holds user 푖’s rating for item 푗. (The
entry is zero if user 푖did not rate item 푗.) The algorithm is
parameterized by an embedding dimension 푑≪min(푚,푛).
Training output: Matrix factorization computes a low-rank
approximation of the matrix U. More precisely, it outputs a
matrix of 푑-dimensional user embeddings A ∈R푚×푑and a
matrix of 푑-dimensional item embeddings B ∈R푑×푛such that
U ≈A·B. The algorithm finds matrices A and B that minimize
the Frobenius norm ∥U−A·B∥퐹(i.e., the sum of the squared
entries of matrix U−A·B). This can be computed in two steps:
first compute a suitable matrix B that is row-orthonormal, then
derive the associated matrix A as A := U·B⊤.
This output has a simple interpretation: the 푑-dimensional
user and item embeddings model each user’s preferences and
each item’s characteristics in terms of 푑shared latent factors.
Serving recommendations: To generate recommendations
for user 푖, the system outputs the items that it estimates the
user would rate the highest using its low-rank approximation
U ≈A · B, and that user 푖has not already seen. In partic-
ular, denoting the rows of the user-embedding matrix A as
a(1),...,a(푚) ∈R1×푑, the recommender outputs the items
corresponding to the largest entries of a(푖) ·B to user 푖.
When the matrix B is orthonormal (as described above),
the matrix A is equal to U·B⊤and so this output is equivalent
to finding the largest entries of u(푖) ·B⊤B, where u(푖) ∈R1×푛
is the 푖th row of the original matrix U. This view has two
appealing properties: first, the recommendations provided to
user 푖depend only on its own ratings (i.e., vector u(푖)) and on
the learned item embeddings B—that is, user 푖learns no more
information about other users’ ratings than is encoded in the
item embeddings B [122]. Second, to generate recommenda-
tions for users who join after training completed (or who have
since rated new items), it suffices to gather their ratings and
use the already-computed item embeddings B.
3
System design
A Nudge deployment consists of three infrastructure providers
and many users and items. We refer to the infrastructure
providers as “servers,” though each provider might run on
many physical machines. Much as in recent deployments of
private telemetry [17,63], we envision that, in practice, these
Nudge servers could be run by one or multiple companies
together with non-profit or governmental entities. A real-
world example is the Prio deployment of exposure notification:
CDC and ISRG were the non-colluding entities [2,51].
3.1
Goals and threat model
The Nudge users and servers interact to aggregate all users’
ratings with two goals: (1) training a recommender model
that produces useful item recommendations for each user and
(2) protecting the users’ privacy—i.e., hiding which items each
user rated and what its ratings are from the Nudge servers and
from other users, in a cryptographic sense.
A Nudge deployment with 푚users and 푛items is parameter-
ized by an integer 푑≪min(푚,푛), representing the dimension
of embeddings output by the training process. The Nudge
servers then jointly implement the following functionality in
a secure multiparty computation:
1. From each user 푖∈[푚], receive a rating vector u(푖) ∈R푛.
Assemble the 푚rating vectors into a matrix U ∈R푚×푛.
2. Set (A ∈R푚×푑,B ∈R푑×푛) ←ApproxFactor(U), where
ApproxFactor is an approximate matrix-factorization al-
gorithm (described in Section 5).
3. Outputs: Send the item embeddings B (i.e., the learned
“model”) to each of the three Nudge servers. Send the
recommendation vector u(푖) ·B⊤B to user 푖.
4. Additional leakage: For each user 푖∈[푚], send each of
the Nudge servers the number of non-zero entries (but
not their location or values) in user 푖’s rating vector u(푖).
As we discuss in Section 5, in reality, our multiparty compu-
tation represents real numbers with fixed-precision values.
Security goal: Protect user privacy against one honest-but-
curious server colluding with malicious users. Against one
honest-but-curious server and any number of malicious clients,
Nudge should reveal nothing about the secret matrix U of users’
ratings, apart from (1) what the learned item embeddings B
reveal, and (2) how many items each user rated. (We could
eliminate the latter leakage by requiring all users to submit
a constant number of ratings.) Intuitively, this reveals the
characterization of items in terms of 푑latent factors.
In some settings, when combined with sufficient side in-
formation, these recommendations themselves can be too re-
vealing [35]. As a standard mitigation against such attacks,
we show in Section 9 how to augment Nudge to provide dif-
ferential privacy to protect each users’ ratings vector—that
is, the learned item embeddings B are differentially private
with respect to any user’s ratings vector—at modest cost in
recommendation quality [60,122].

--- Page 4 ---
Figure 1:
The three
Nudge
servers
first
collect
secret-shared
ratings
from
users,
then run matrix factor-
ization in a three-party
computation to pro-
duce user and item
embeddings,
and
finally
serve
secret-
shared,
personalized
recommendations.
In addition, we show in the full version of this paper that the
learned item embeddings B satisfy another desirable property:
they are “anonymous” [51, Definition 2], in the sense that each
Nudge server’s view remains identical when any two users
(with the same number of ratings) shuffle their rating vectors.
Security extension: Input validation. In some applications,
the servers may want to enforce application-defined validity
checks on the user-submitted rating vectors to ensure that no
user can have an outsize influence on the computed recom-
mendations (e.g., checking that each user rates at most 푘items,
with ratings in a pre-determined range). These checks again
protect client privacy against one honest-but-curious server.
Non-goals. Nudge does not protect against a malicious server
who deviates from the prescribed protocol; such a server could
disrupt the correctness of Nudge’s outputs, the privacy of
Nudge’s users, or the availability of Nudge’s service. Nudge
also does not protect against two or more servers who collude.
Finally, Nudge does not hide metadata: the servers learn when
each user sends its messages.
Remark 3.1 (Differences to federated learning). Nudge dif-
fers from federated learning [121] in two ways: first, Nudge
does not leak intermediate model versions to users or servers.
Second, the Nudge servers train the recommendation model
without involving users: users only need to submit their ratings
and, later on, fetch their recommendations. At the same time,
Nudge splits trust across three servers, while some federated-
learning systems only require one or two [26,120,143].
3.2
Protocol flow
The Nudge protocol (Figure 1) takes place in three steps.
Step 1: Private data collection. Each user 푖succinctly secret
shares their rating vector u(푖) ∈R푛and sends one share to
each server. As we discuss in Section 3.1, the Nudge servers
can run checks between the three of them to verify that all
client submissions are well-formed.
Step 2: Private matrix factorization. Once the servers all
hold a secret share of the matrix U ∈R푚×푛, they run the three-
Figure 2: A matrix-vector program with functions 푓1,..., 푓ℓ,
evaluated on input matrices M1,...,Mℓ, and input vector v.
party matrix-factorization protocol, described in Section 5, to
factor U into a secret-shared matrix A ∈R푚×푑of user embed-
dings and a cleartext matrix B ∈R푑×푛of item embeddings.
Step 3: Privately fetching recommendations. The recom-
mendation scores for user 푖are just the values a(푖) ·B, where
a(푖) is the 푖th user embedding, stored in the 푖th row of A. For
each client, the Nudge servers can compute secret shares of
user 푖’s recommendation scores and forward these shares to
the user, who reconstructs the scores in plaintext.
Security analysis. Security of the overall system relies on the
security of our new three-party matrix-factorization protocol,
which we prove in Theorem 5.1.
4
Secure computation primitives
In this section, we introduce the specific multi-party compu-
tation protocols Nudge uses.
Our protocols work in the three-party honest-majority set-
ting with an honest-but-curious adversary. That is, each party
correctly executes the protocol, and we protect against an ad-
versary that can compromise the state of a single party. We
define security of a multiparty protocol using the standard
real/ideal paradigm [113]. We assume that all parties have
access to a cryptographic pseudorandom function (PRF) and
that each pair of parties holds pairwise shared secret keys [20].
We refer to this setting as the “3PC with PRF” model.
Notation: 2-out-of-3 replicated secret sharing. A secret-
sharing scheme makes it possible to split a value 푥∈R into
shares, where each share individually hides 푥but together the
shares encode 푥. A replicated sharing of 푥is a tuple of pairs
((푥1,푥2), (푥0,푥2), (푥0,푥1)), where 푥0 +푥1 +푥2 = 푥and party 푖
holds the 푖th pair. We denote a replicated sharing of 푥as ⟦푥⟧.
We say that a function 푓: R푑→R푑, on ring R and integer
dimension 푑≥1, has a 3PC protocol if three parties holding
replicated shares ⟦v⟧of a vector v ∈R푑can compute repli-
cated shares ⟦푓(v)⟧, without learning anything about v. The
full version gives precise correctness and security definitions.
To measure computation costs over a ring R, we count R
operations and PRF invocations, each mapping a 휆-bit seed to
an element in R, as having unit cost. For efficiency, we work
with rings R of the form Z2푏with integer bit length 푏≥1.

--- Page 5 ---
Function
Communication
Computation Rounds
Any degree-two func.
3푑푏
푂(푚푑)
1
with 푚monomials
SIMD operation on each entry of the vector
Zero-test [32]
2푑푏· (휆+2)
e
푂(푑푏)
1
Integer compare [32]
2푑푏· (휆+2푏+2)
e
푂(푑푏)
1
Truncate 푡bits (§4.3)
2푑푡· (휆+4) +10푑푏
e
푂(푑푏)
3
Normalize vector to have unit 퐿2-norm
Approx. (§4.3)
푂(푑푏휆+휆푏2 + 푏3)
푂(푑푏+ 푏2)
푂(1)
Table 3: Functions with constant-round 3PC protocols, map-
ping vectors in R푑to vectors in R푑on ring R = Z2푏with
bit length 푏, dimension 푑≥1, and PRF-seed length 휆. We
hide logarithmic factors (in 푏and 휆) in the notation e
푂(·). We
highlight the new protocols from Section 4.3 in yellow.
4.1
Matrix-vector programs
We first define matrix-vector programs, which capture a class
of computations that are particularly amenable to execution
in a three-party computation (illustrated in Figure 2). We do
not claim this model as a top-level contribution—our goal
is to give a clean abstraction in which we can express our
matrix-factorization algorithm.
Definition 4.1 (Matrix-vector program). A matrix-vector pro-
gram P is defined with respect to a ring R and a function class
F, that consists of a set of functions 푓1,..., 푓ℓ∈F mapping
vectors in R to vectors in R. The program P takes as input a
vector v ∈R푑and a set of matrices M1,...,Mℓover R. We
define the program’s output to be the vector, whose dimension
is defined implicitly by the 푓s and Ms, computed as:
P(v,M1,...,Mℓ) := 푓ℓ(Mℓ· ... · 푓2 (M2 · 푓1 (M1v))) .
Looking ahead, in Section 5 we will cast iterative algorithms
for approximate matrix decomposition [83] as matrix-vector
programs. This matrix-vector-program abstraction may be
useful in secure computation settings beyond the scope of this
work; for example, evaluating a secret-shared neural network
on secret-shared inputs (e.g., in private model fine-tuning);
training a secret-shared network using gradient descent; com-
puting the steady-state of a private Markov chain; or running
belief propagation algorithms on secret-shared graphs.
4.2
Synthesizing prior work: Three-party com-
putation of matrix-vector programs
The following theorem synthesizes multiple ideas in related
work [20,33,125] for evaluating matrix-vector programs in a
3PC with concrete efficiency. It shows that, if a matrix-vector
program is defined with respect to a set F of 3PC-friendly
functions, it is possible to evaluate the program in a 3PC with
communication sublinear in the input size. In particular, the
parties’ communication scales only with the largest size of an
intermediate vector, not with the size of the input matrices.
The number of rounds of interaction scales with the number
of input matrices. When the matrices are large enough that
the matrix-vector products dominate the overall compute, the
per-party work in the 3PC protocol is only 3× larger than
evaluating cleartext matrix-vector products of the same size.
Theorem 4.2 (3PC for matrix-vector programs). Let F be the
class of functions that have a constant-round 3PC protocol in
the 3PC with PRF model. Let P be a matrix-vector program
over function class F and ring R = Z2푏with bit length 푏≥1,
consisting of functions 푓1,..., 푓ℓ∈F where each 푓푗: R푑푗→
R푑푗. Moreover, let the 3PC for computing 푓푗use 푠푗∈N bits
of communication and 푤푗∈N computation.
Then, three parties holding replicated shares of the inputs
to P can securely compute replicated shares of the output
of P in the 3PC with PRF model, using 푂(ℓ) rounds of in-
teraction, Íℓ
푖=1 (6푏푑푖+ 푠푖) total bits of communication, and
Íℓ
푖=1 (6푑푖−1푑푖+8푑푖+ 푤푖) total operations on each party.
Proof idea. We prove Theorem 4.2 in the full version. The
idea, used heavily in prior work [20, 125], is that three par-
ties can non-interactively evaluate matrix-vector products on
secret-shared data using properties of replicated sharing.
□
In Table 3, we list the 3PC-friendly non-linear functions that
we will need for our matrix-factorization algorithm, includ-
ing new protocols that we describe next. Our new protocols
build on function secret sharing [32, 33], which leverages
PRFs to evaluate zero-test and comparison gates on secret-
shared inputs with a single round of interaction (see Table 3).
There are many other 3PC-friendly non-linear functions in
the literature [12,31,79–81,96,147,149,154,158,164].
4.3
3PC protocols for non-linear functions
We now describe new protocols in the 3PC-with-PRF model
for fixed-point truncation and vector normalization.
The need for these particular functions stems from a mis-
match between 3PC techniques, which operate over a ring
R = Z2푏, and data mining, statistics, and machine-learning
computations, which operate over the reals. Standard practice
bridges this gap using fixed-point arithmetic [38, 73, 134]:
given a number of fractional bits of precision 푡< 푏, represent
the real value 푣as the ring element ⌊푣·2푡⌋∈R. As long as the
data values never grow too large (i.e., do not “wrap around”
the modulus 2푏), adding two real values is just addition in R.
Multiplying two real values requires a multiplication in R,
then a truncation by 푡bits to return to the correct data format.
As a result, the efficiency of two non-linear operations on
secret-shared data is paramount: truncation, which follows
every multiplication gate, and normalization, which prevents
the represented data values from growing too large.

--- Page 6 ---
Truncating a secret-shared value. A long line of work in-
vestigates truncation on secret-shared data [31,38,65,86,125,
126,160,166,168] with various functionalities and, in some
cases, leakage [109]. We perform deterministic truncation
with sign extensions and no leakage [31], assuming one bit of
slack [54,65]: that is, on input 푣∈[−2푏−2,2푏−2), we evaluate
the arithmetic-right-shift function Trunc푡(푣) := (푣≫푡).
Our technique builds on the three-round, three-party ap-
proach of Jawalkar et al. [96, Theorem 6]. At a high level, we
implement truncation by dividing the share ⟦푣⟧by 2푡, then
1. using an integer comparison, shown in Table 3, to handle
any erroneous carries in the lowest-order bits [31] and
2. using the one bit of slack to prevent any erroneous carries
the highest-order bits [65].
Under the hood in step (1), our protocol performs a degree-
two computation, that in turn allows the integer comparison
to output as few bits as possible. As a result, when truncating
by 푡< 푏bits, our communication scales as 2푡(휆+ 4) + 10푏,
i.e., dominated by the term 휆푡, while prior state-of-the-art
truncation scales as 2푏· (휆+ 6) −6푡, i.e., dominated by the
term 휆푏[96]. In Nudge where 휆= 푏= 128 and 푡= 20, this is
a ≈푏/푡= 6× improvement in communication. We give our
full protocol in this paper’s full version, showing:
Lemma 4.3 (3PC for truncation). In the 3PC-with-PRF model
over ring R = Z2푏, with 푡∈[0,푏−1] bits to truncate and 휆-bit
PRF seeds, there exists a secure 3PC protocol for the function
Trunc푡: R푑→R푑using three rounds, 2푑푡· (휆+ 4) + 10푑푏
bits of communication, and 푂(푑푏log푡) total operations.
Normalizing a secret-shared vector. L2-Normalization in
a 3PC requires mapping shares of a vector ⟦v⟧to shares of
the normalized vector ⟦v/∥v∥⟧, which points in the same
direction but has unit norm. To this end, the three parties
must compute the scaling factor ⟦1/∥v∥⟧. Three parties can
compute the squared norm ⟦∥v∥2⟧via a degree-two function,
but computing its “inverse-square-root” is challenging.
Prior works take one of two routes: the first uses exact
lookup tables [157,158] or more granular piecewise approx-
imations [31, 81, 154] in a way that is constant-round, but
where the compute grows exponentially with the precision
required—i.e., it is 2푂(푏) on bit length 푏. These approaches
have only been used on bit length 푏∈{16,64} [81,154]. In
contrast, to run with many users, Nudge uses 푏= 128. The
second route resorts to iterative numerical methods that guar-
antee any desired level of accuracy [105], but must be seeded
with a reasonable starting point [38, 47, 103, 118, 141, 160].
Finding this starting point is tricky: prior works use 푂(푏)
rounds [22], large look-up tables [141], or leaky protocols
that reveal the bit length of ∥v∥2 (or a blinded version of it to
achieve statistical security) [47,160].
We show a simple way to handle the starting-point issue
in the 3PC setting that is single-round, has low communica-
tion, and has no extra leakage: using function secret shar-
ing to compute the “most significant non-zero bit” [31, The-
orem 14] of ⟦∥v∥2⟧.
(Under the hood, this just invokes
푏+1 simultaneous integer comparisons, shown in Table 3.)
A linear combination then gives shares of the approxima-
tion ⟦푥⟧= ⟦2−

log ∥v∥2
/2⟧≈⟦1/∥v∥⟧, which we refine, as
in prior works, with the standard Newton-Raphson itera-
tion [38,47,103,160]. This method evaluates a degree-three
polynomial that doubles the number of correct digits in ⟦푥⟧
each time; it can be run for a constant number of steps (as done
by Nudge) for approximate results, or for 푂(log푏) steps for
full accuracy [105]. We define the function ApproxNormalize
and detail a 3PC protocol for it in the full version, proving:
Lemma 4.4 (3PC for approximate normalization). In the
3PC with PRF model over a ring R = Z2푏with 휆-bit PRF
seeds, there exists a secure 3PC protocol for the function
ApproxNormalize : R푑→R푑in 푂(1) rounds, 푂(푑푏휆+휆푏2+
푏3) bits of communication, and 푂(푑푏+ 푏2) operations.
5
Private matrix factorization
Next, we apply the three-party computation framework of
Section 4 to design a protocol for private matrix factorization.
Recall from Section 2 that a matrix-factorization algorithm
takes in a matrix U ∈R푚×푛and a dimension 푑≤min(푚,푛)
and then outputs a pair of matrices A ∈R푚×푑and B ∈R푑×푛
that factor U ≈A·B. In Section 5.1, we describe how to use
power iteration to factor a matrix. In Section 5.2, we show how
to run this algorithm with repeated invocations of a matrix-
vector program, letting us instantiate it in the 3PC framework.
The proof sketch in Section 5.2 then gives:
Theorem 5.1 (3PC for matrix factorization). In the 3PC
with PRF model, on seed length 휆∈N, ring R = Z2푏with
bit length 푏≥1, and public parameter ℓ∈N denoting the
number of iterations of the power-iteration algorithm, for
any 푚,푛∈N and 푑≤min(푚,푛), three parties that hold se-
cret shares of a matrix ⟦U⟧∈R푚×푛can securely evaluate
the power-iteration algorithm to compute a secret-shared
matrix ⟦A⟧∈R푚×푑and a cleartext matrix B ∈R푑×푛in
푂(푑ℓ) rounds, 푂 휆푑ℓ푏· (푚+푛) +휆푑ℓ푏2 + 푑ℓ푏3 communi-
cation, and 푂 푑ℓ푚푛+ 푑ℓ푏· (푚+푛) + 푑ℓ푏2 operations.
5.1
Background: power iteration
We compute matrix factorizations using a classic algorithm
from the 1920s: power iteration, also known as “vector iter-
ation” or the “power method” [74,123,152]. We give pseu-
docode for our repeated application of power iteration in Fig-
ure 4. At its core, this algorithm leverages the linear-algebra
fact that, to find a pair of matrices A ∈R푚×푑and B ∈R푑×푛

--- Page 7 ---
Algorithm: Matrix factorization via power iteration.
Parameterized by ℓ≥1 iterations and dimension 푑≥1.
// Compute A,B to be a rank-푑approximation of U
ApproxFactor(U ∈R푚×푛) →A ∈R푚×푑,B ∈R푑×푛
• Initialize B to be the all-zeros matrix in R푑×푛.
• For 푖from 1 to 푑:
– Initialize v ∈R푛to a random vector.
Run v := Normalize(SetOrthogonal(v,B)).
– For 푗from 1 to ℓ:
∗Update v := Mul(U⊤,Mul(U,v)).
∗Update v := SetOrthogonal(v,B).
∗Update v := Normalize(v).
– Set the 푖th row of B equal to v.
• Compute A := U·B⊤. Output A, B.
// Set v orthogonal to all rows in B (Gram-Schmidt)
SetOrthogonal(v ∈R푛,B ∈R푑×푛) →v′ ∈R푛
• For 푖from 1 to 푑:
– Let b ∈R푛be the 푖th row of B.
– Set v := v−⟨v,b⟩·b.
• Output v.
Figure 4: Matrix factorization via power iteration [123].
that minimize the Frobenius norm ∥U−A·B∥퐹, it suffices to
set the rows of B to be the top-푑eigenvectors with the largest
eigenvalues of the square matrix U⊤U. After this, finding the
associated A is a linear operation: A := U·B⊤.
Finding dominant eigenvectors. To find the eigenvectors
with the largest eigenvalues, the algorithm in Figure 4 extracts
eigenvectors one at a time, in order of decreasing eigenvalue.
To do so, the algorithm applies the square matrix M := U⊤U
to itself many times. The eigenvector with the largest eigen-
value of M is its “direction of maximum stretch”. For a large
enough power ℓ≥1 and a random vector v, computing the
vector v′ := Mℓ·v stretches v the most in the direction of the
dominant eigenvector, until v′ essentially equals matrix M’s
dominant eigenvector. (During this computation, we normal-
ize the vector at each step to avoid overflow/underflow.)
After finding an eigenvector, the algorithm starts with a
vector orthogonal to the eigenvector(s) previously recovered.
It then repeats the powering step to extract the next eigenvector.
Powering a random vector v, that is orthogonal to all already-
computed eigenvectors, ensures that v will not get stretched
in the direction of the already-computed vectors—so, this
recovers the eigenvector with the next largest eigenvalue.¹
When using fixed-point arithmetic, we re-orthogonalize the
vectors at every step.
Remark 5.2 (Why power iteration?). Power iteration has a
number of appealing properties: it has few hyperparameters
to tune; it is relatively numerically stable [83]; it is robust
to (even adversarially generated) noise [84]; it can be made
differentially private [60,122], as we discuss in Section 9; and
there are theoretical guarantees on its convergence [148]. For
example, letting 훾be the ratio between the matrix M’s largest
and second-largest eigenvalues, power iteration converges to
a vector that is within 퐿2-distance 휖from the top eigenvector
in ℓ= 푂(log(푛/휖)/훾) iterations [128].
5.2
Power iteration as a matrix-vector program
Proof sketch of Theorem 5.1. We securely evaluate power
iteration across three parties that hold shares of the matrix ⟦U⟧
to be factored. At the end of the protocol, each party learns
secret shares of the matrix ⟦A⟧and the cleartext matrix B.
To do so, we cast the powering step in Figure 4 as a matrix-
vector program (Definition 4.1) over the ring R = Z2푏and the
function class F containing three functions:
• normalize(v): 퐿2-normalize the vector v,
• truncate푡(v): perform an arithmetic right shift (i.e., with
sign extension) by 푡bits on each element of v, and
• orthogonalizeB(v): compute the component of v that is
orthogonal to all vectors in B.
At the end of each powering step, our parties reveal and learn
the computed row of matrix B in the clear. This design lever-
ages power iteration’s structure: it iteratively computes a por-
tion of the matrix B at each step. (In contrast, gradient descent
iteratively refines the entire recommender model at each step.)
So, the three parties can learn B in cleartext as it is computed:
aiding the computation while incurring no additional leakage.
To complete our protocol and apply Theorem 4.2, we must
specify three things: (1) how to embed the real numbers into
the finite ring Z2푏, (2) how to write the inner loop of Figure 4
as a matrix-vector program, and (3) how to implement the
functions in F in a concretely-efficient 3PC.
1. Embedding the reals in Z2푏. We use the standard fixed-
point techniques [125] described in Section 4.3. As in prior
work [19,101], we perform the truncations needed after each
multiplication lazily: we replace any occurrences of “truncate-
then-add” by “add-then-truncate”. If the bit length 푏has
sufficient space, we instead truncate by 2푡bits after every
¹This process achieves the same functionality as “blocked power iteration” or
“subspace iteration” [148, Section 5.1], but we unroll the blocks here to take
advantage of the fact that, when we will run in a 3PC, each successive row
of the matrix B will be revealed in cleartext.

--- Page 8 ---
two multiplications. With these optimizations, running power
iteration only requires truncating vectors—never matrices.
2. Inner loop as a matrix-vector program. The inner loop
of power iteration (Figure 4) has precisely the structure of a
matrix-vector program: it alternates between (a) applying the
matrices U⊤and U to a vector v, and (b) truncating, orthog-
onalizing, and normalizing the intermediate vectors. In our
3PC, the honest-but-curious parties jointly sample a cleartext
initial vector v, from which they can locally derive ⟦v⟧.
3. Implementing non-linear layers in F. Beyond vector
normalization and fixed-point truncation (described in Sec-
tion 4.3), the only remaining operation is orthogonalization.
Orthogonalization is a linear function of the shares of vector
⟦v⟧since each party knows the matrix B in cleartext; as such,
it can be performed locally, without any communication.
6
Implementation
Our Nudge prototype consists of 7,296 lines of Go code, us-
ing C to implement the matrix-multiplication core, along
with 2,736 lines to implement the function-secret-sharing
tools (as per Section 4.3).
Nudge uses AES as a cryp-
tographic PRF. We open-source our implementation at
https://github.com/NudgeArtifact/private-recs.
Collecting ratings from users. Each user secret shares each
of its ratings using a distributed point function that outputs
replicated shares [11,32]. (Using distributed point functions
here reveals to the servers how many items each user rated.)
The Nudge servers then run checks to verify that all submis-
sions are well-formed. In theory, Nudge could check arbitrary
predicates on users’ submissions using zero-knowledge proofs
on secret-shared data [29,51]. As detailed in the full version of
this paper, we instead implement a simple check that ensures
that all secret-shared ratings lie in {0,1}. This check follows
prior work [10] and is almost free in our three-party setting:
the Nudge servers check all submissions at once by exchang-
ing 푂(휆) bits, on security parameter 휆. If the check fails, the
servers can binary search to identify malformed submissions.
Concrete parameters. Nudge takes the bit length of the ring
푏= 128, the number of fractional bits 푡= 20, and the seed
length to a cryptographic PRF 휆= 128. During normaliza-
tion, Nudge increases the precision to 40 fractional bits and
performs 5 iterations of Newton-Raphson approximation.
Picking hyperparameters for power iteration. The embed-
ding dimension 푑should be set using application-dependent
context. Following common practice on the data sets we eval-
uate on, we run Nudge with 푑in the range 8–50 [68]. The
larger 푑, the more accurate the recommendations, but also the
more user information they encode. The number of power
iterations ℓ(Section 5.1) is a fixed constant that trades off
between quality and cost: the larger ℓ, the more accurate the
matrix factorization, but the more expensive it is to compute.
By default, Nudge takes ℓ= 10. (In our evaluation, we experi-
ment with various choices of ℓon the validation set and see
that ℓin the range 5–100 perform comparably.)
7
Evaluation
In our evaluation, we answer the following questions:
• Section 7.1: How good are Nudge’s recommendations,
compared to non-private recommendation algorithms?
• Section 7.2: What is the cost of Nudge’s private matrix
factorization, compared to prior private approaches?
• Section 7.3: How do Nudge’s costs scale to large collec-
tions of items and users?
• Section 7.4: What is the end-to-end performance of serv-
ing private recommendations in Nudge?
Experimental setup. We run each Nudge server on a memory-
optimized r7a.48xlarge AWS instance with 192 cores and
1,536 GB of RAM (costing $14.6064 per hour). We run
on these large-RAM machines because of the computation’s
memory demands: the secret-shared matrix is over 200 GB
on the Netflix dataset and over 1.3 TB on the Yelp dataset.
On the smaller MovieLens data sets, we instead run each
server on a r7a.large instance (2 cores, 16 GB of RAM)
or a r7a.4xlarge instance (16 cores, 128 GB of RAM).
Between the Nudge servers, we simulate two network settings:
a local area network (LAN), with 50 GBps of bandwidth and
a 0.25 ms RTT, and a wide area network (WAN), with 5 GBps
of bandwidth and a 10 ms RTT. We count the cost of AWS
data transfer as $0.01 per GB. Finally, we run a user on a
r7a.medium instance (1 core, 8 GB of RAM). To measure
throughput, we run many users on a r7a.4xlarge instance
(16 cores, 128 GiB of RAM). We simulate the link between a
user and the Nudge servers as 100 Mbps with a 50 ms RTT.
We measure Nudge’s quality and performance on the Netflix
data set [7], released as part of the Netflix prize competition
(2006–2009). Following the recommendations literature [68,
110], we preprocess the data set to keep users that rated at
least 5 items and to binarize the ratings (i.e., ratings on a
scale of 1–5 are mapped to “1” if they are four or larger, and
“0” otherwise). To compare to prior work, we also measure
Nudge’s costs on the smaller MovieLens data sets [5]. Finally,
we report Nudge’s costs on matrices whose sizes match a range
of large-scale recommender data sets described in Section 7.3.
7.1
Nudge’s recommendation quality
In Figure 5, we compare the quality of the recommendations
produced by Nudge and a suite of standard recommender
algorithms (run in cleartext). These algorithms include

--- Page 9 ---
TopPopular
ItemKNN
GraphWalk
ALS
SVD
Nudge
MultVAE
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Recall@k: fraction of ground-
truth items in the top-k recs,
at k=20, 50, and 100
better
TopPopular
ItemKNN
GraphWalk
ALS
SVD
Nudge
MultVAE
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
nDCG@k normalized by that of
Nudge, at k=20, 50, and 100
better
Figure 5: Nudge’s recommendation quality on the Netflix
data set [7] matches that of the cleartext matrix-factorization
algorithms (ALS, SVD), exceeds the textbook recommender
algorithms (TopPopular, ItemKNN, GraphWalk), and is within
12% of a deep-neural-network approach (MultVAE). We re-
port numbers besides Nudge’s from the survey of Dacrema et
al. [68]; their SVD/ALS baselines use embedding dimension
푑= 55/푑= 146, while Nudge uses 푑= 50.
• three textbook approaches: TopPopular, which recom-
mends the most popular items [53], ItemKNN, a nearest-
neighbor search on the items [150], and GraphWalk, a
random walk on the user-item-interaction graph [50],
• two matrix-factorization techniques: ALS, matrix factor-
ization via alternating least squares [92], and SVD, the
classic singular value decomposition [53], and
• a recent, neural-network-based approach: MultVAE,
which uses variational autoencoders [110].
Experiment. To evaluate recommender quality, we run the
following experiment, common in the recommendations liter-
ature [68]: we hold out a fraction of a user’s ratings (i.e., “1”s
in the binarized matrix), and then measure how often each
algorithm recommends the held-out items that the user actu-
ally rated. In more detail, we split the data set into training,
validation, and test sets by selecting 10,000 users for each of
the validation and test sets and, for each such user, including
80% of their ratings in the training set and using the remaining
20% as “ground truth” ratings in the validation and test sets
respectively, as per prior work [68, 110]. (All other users’
ratings are added to the training set.) We report performance
on the test set, measuring the following standard metrics:
• Recall at 푘: what fraction of the “ground-truth” ratings
(i.e., items that the user rated highly, but this was held
out from training) are in the top-푘recommended items?
• Normalized discounted cumulative gain (nDCG) at 푘:
how many of the “ground-truth” ratings are surfaced in
the top-푘recommended items, weighted by each item’s
rank in the top-푘list (with logarithmic discount) and
normalized by the best-possible ranking [95]?
For each metric, higher scores indicate better recommenda-
tions and the maximum score is 1.
Results. Figure 5 shows that Nudge’s recommendation qual-
ity matches the matrix-factorization baselines and is within
12% of the deep-neural-network approach. In particular, at
cutoff 푘= 20, the textbook algorithms achieve a nDCG score
of 0.11–0.26, the matrix-factorization algorithms achieve a
nDCG score of 0.24–0.29, and the neural algorithm achieves a
nDCG score of 0.31. Nudge achieves a nDCG of 0.29. More-
over, at 푘= 20, Nudge’s recall score is 0.23—that is, 23% of
the held-out, “ground-truth” items appear in the list of top-20
recommendations produced by Nudge, on average.
These results show that Nudge’s differences to a cleartext
matrix-factorization algorithm (namely, performing a fixed
number of steps of power iteration and using fixed-point arith-
metic with deferred truncations and approximate normaliza-
tions) do not noticeably affect its recommendation quality.
Finally, we measure the quality of Nudge’s recommender
algorithm using 10-fold cross-validation (by partitioning the
users into 10 folds and performing the evaluation experiment
on each fold); each of Nudge’s nDCG and recall scores at
푘∈{20,50,100} remain the same as in Figure 5.
7.2
Nudge’s private matrix factorization
In Table 6, we benchmark the main performance overhead in
Nudge: private matrix factorization (Section 5). Asymptot-
ically, for a fixed embedding dimension 푑and with 푚users
and 푛items, Nudge’s compute scales as 푂(푚푛) and its com-
munication scales as 푂(푚+푛). Concretely, Nudge factors the
full Netflix data set—which contains 76× more users, 4.5×
more items, and 50× more ratings than the largest data set
previously used for private recommendation—in 50 min of
wall-clock time, with 40 GB of communication between the
three Nudge servers, running on a local-area network. In total,
this costs $37 on AWS. On a wide-area network, the wall-
clock time increases to 1h 13 mins and the communication
stays the same (costing $54 on AWS).
Nudge outperforms prior private-matrix-factorization sys-
tems and 3PC baselines, as we describe next.
Prior private recommender systems. A range of prior works
perform private matrix factorization with semi-honest security:
Nikolaenko et al. [133] use garbled circuits to run gradient
descent between two non-colluding parties. The GraphSC
system [130] parallelizes these garbled-circuits computations.

--- Page 10 ---
Runtime
System
Non-colluding
servers
Algorithm
Dim. 푑
Rounds
Server-to-server
comm. (GB)
LAN
WAN
Cores
Subset of MovieLens100K: 940 users, 40 movies, and 14,683 ratings.
Nikolaenko et al.♣[133]
2
gradient descent
-
1
1,330
29 hr
-
32
Nudge
3
power iteration
8
7,080
0.1
2.8 sec
34.1 sec
6
MovieLens100K: 943 users, 1,682 movies, and 100K ratings.
PIRSONA♠[157]
4
gradient descent
8
-
4.6
-
11.7 mins
32
Nudge
3
power iteration
8
7,080
0.5
10.7 sec
51.8 sec
6
MovieLens1M: 6,040 users, 3,883 movies, and 1 million ratings.
GraphSC♣[130]
2
gradient descent
10
1
78,125
est. 11 days
-
128
Nudge in MP-SPDZ [101]
3
power iteration
10
11,057,010
1.5
52.4 min
est. 1.3 days
48
Nudge
3
power iteration
10
9,150
1.4
32.8 sec
1.8 min
48
Netflix: 463,435 users, 17,769 movies, and 56 million ratings.
Nudge
3
power iteration
50
75,750
38.9
50.2 min
1h 13 min
576
Table 6: Nudge runs faster and incurs less communication than prior systems for private matrix factorization. We bold the best
performance on each data set, running Nudge on fewer cores than prior work. All systems provide semi-honest security. We
report the performance and configurations specified in each paper, using - to indicate unknown values. We scale the costs for
Nikolaenko el al. [133] and PIRSONA [157], who report a single iteration of gradient descent, linearly according to the fact that
gradient descent requires 10 iterations on the subset of MovieLens100K (as used by Kim et al. [102]) and 20 iterations on the full
MovieLens100K (as used by recommender libraries [93]). Column 8 gives the total number of cores used across all parties. ♣We
estimate communication based on microbenchmarks and the linear scaling described. ♠We compute PIRSONA’s communication
using Table 1. PIRSONA’s WAN setup diverges from ours: it runs on 4 servers in different availability zones.
Unlike Nudge, these protocols require only two non-colluding
servers, use a single round of interaction, and have asymp-
totically better computation (that scales with the number of
ratings, rather than the product of users and items 푚푛). At the
same time, however, they incur asymptotically larger server-
to-server communication costs (that scale with the number of
ratings, rather than the sum of users and items 푚+푛). In con-
crete terms, these systems have over four orders of magnitude
higher communication and compute costs than Nudge.
In particular, Nikolaenko et al. [133] run on a subset of
the MovieLens100K data set: they report 29 hrs (using 32
cores) and over 1 TB of server-to-server communication to
run gradient descent; Nudge factors the same data set in 2.8
sec (using 6 cores) and 0.1 GB. GraphSC [130] run on the
MovieLens1M data set: they report 11 days of compute (using
128 cores) and over 76 TB of communication; Nudge factors
the same data set in 33 seconds (using 48 cores) and 1.4 GB.
We expect very recent, state-of-the-art techniques for SIMD
garbling [77] to shave an order of magnitude off of GraphSC’s
computation and communication, though they do not evalu-
ate on the matrix-factorization task. Other new techniques
for communication-efficient garbling [116] could shrink the
communication, but would further increase the compute.
Again using two non-colluding servers, Kim et al. [102]
improve the cost of garbled-circuit-based matrix factorization
with homomorphic encryption, at the cost of leaking which
users rated which items. (The authors propose to obfuscate
this leakage by having each user log some fake ratings.) They
require 15 mins (using 6 cores) and 5.7 GB on the same sub-
set of MovieLens100K. Nudge remains 320× faster while
incurring 57× less communication.
Finally, PIRSONA [157] performs private matrix factor-
ization by running gradient descent in a bespoke multi-party
computation between four semi-honest, non-colluding parties.
Like Nudge, PIRSONA’s communication scales as 푂(푚+푛).
PIRSONA reports 11.7 mins (using 32 cores) and 4.6 GB to
run full gradient descent on the MovieLens100K data set on a
WAN setup. Nudge factors the same data set in 51.8 seconds
(using 6 cores) and 0.5 GB on our WAN setup—saving 8× in
communication and requiring one fewer non-colluding party.
Baseline: Three-party arithmetic computation. To evalu-
ate the impact of Nudge’s three-party protocols for truncation
and normalization (Section 4.3), we re-implement and bench-
mark Nudge’s same power iteration algorithm, written as a
matrix-vector program, using the MP-SPDZ framework [101].
Like Nudge, MP-SPDZ performs secure computation using
replicated secret sharing over a power-of-two ring; however,
where Nudge uses function secret sharing for non-linear op-

--- Page 11 ---
100
1 K
10 K
100 K
1 M
Number of users
5 min
10 min
30 min
1 hr
2 hr
5 hr
10 hr
Server time in Nudge (over LAN)
Netflix
18 K items
Criteo
700 items
Yelp
148 K items
Steam
15 K items
Pinterest
10 K items
Microsoft news
160 K items
100
1 K
10 K
100 K
1 M
Number of users
20 GB
40 GB
80 GB
160 GB
400 GB
800 GB
1.6 TBServer-server communication in Nudge
10 K items
50 K items
100 K items
500 K items
1 M items
Dataset
Netflix
18 K items
Criteo
700 items
Yelp
148 K items
Steam
15 K items
Pinterest
10 K items
Microsoft news
160 K items
Figure 7: Nudge privately factors matrices with millions of users or items. We measure Nudge’s wall-clock time and server-
to-server communication on matrices of increasing size, keeping the number of items constant (up to 1 TB in size after secret
sharing, which translates to 푚푛≤3.4×1010 with 푚users and 푛items). For context, we show Nudge’s performance on matrices
of the size of public recommendation data sets. In each case, Nudge produces embeddings of dimension 푑= 50, requires 75,750
rounds, and runs on three 192-core machines. For large 푚or 푛, we measure costs with 푑= 5 or 푑= 2 and extrapolate linearly.
erations, MP-SPDZ instead converts to binary secret shares
(as we disallow leaky probabilistic truncations). As a result,
on the MovieLens1M data set, the MP-SPDZ baseline has
approximately the same communication cost as Nudge, but it
requires three orders of magnitude more rounds of interaction.
This increased interaction translates to 95× slower runtime in
a LAN setting or 1040× slower runtime in a WAN setting.
Baseline: No privacy. Dacrema et al. [68] report the cost of
running non-private SVD as 50.53 s on the Netflix data set
(compared to Nudge’s 50 mins); they use one p3.2xlarge
AWS instance with 8 vCPUs, 30 GB of RAM, and one GPU.
As a result, their non-private matrix factorization of Netflix
costs roughly $0.05 on AWS, while Nudge’s costs $37.
7.3
Scaling Nudge to larger data sets
Popular recommender systems handle many millions to bil-
lions of users/items. In Figure 7, we scale Nudge’s private
matrix factorization to data sets with millions of users or items.
As mentioned earlier, given 푚users and 푛items, Nudge’s
compute costs grow as 푂(푚푛) and its communication costs
grow as 푂(푚+푛). The constant factors within these asymp-
totics play an important role: because of lazy truncation (Sec-
tion 5.2), the constant in front of the “푚” term in the commu-
nication is dwarfed by that in front of the “푛” term, causing
the concrete communication to be dominated by the number
of items 푛as soon as 푛grows sufficiently large.
In addition to synthetic benchmarks, we measure Nudge’s
runtime and server-to-server communication costs when pri-
vately factoring matrices whose sizes match those of public
recommendation data sets. On a LAN setup, we measure that:
• Nudge factors a Criteo ads data set [6] (with 푚= 6.1M
users and 푛= 700 ad campaigns) in 1.5 h and 125 GB.
• Nudge factors a Yelp data set [8] (with 푚= 279K users
and 푛= 148K businesses) in 8h and 248 GB.
• Nudge factors a Steam data set [137] (with 푚= 2.5M
users and 푛= 15K video games) in 4.7 hr and 78 GB.
• Nudge factors a Pinterest data set [61] (with 푚= 55K
users and 푛= 10K photos) in under 10 mins and 20 GB.
• Nudge factors a Microsoft-News data set [163] (with
푚= 50K users and 푛= 160K articles) in 3 hr and 263 GB.
7.4
Nudge’s end-to-end performance
In Table 8, we break down the end-to-end costs of serving
private recommendations with Nudge, both analytically and
as measured on the Netflix data set.
With distributed point functions, the user-to-server commu-
nication to log a rating scales logarithmically with the number
of items 푛(concretely, 694 bytes). Each of the three Nudge
servers then performs 푂(푛log푛) operations to log the secret-
shared submission, done in tens of milliseconds of latency and
at a throughput of hundreds of submissions per second. The
servers perform a one-time check that the final secret-shared
matrix U is well-formed, which requires scanning over the
matrix (done in 7.7 min) and exchanging 64 bytes. Finally,

--- Page 12 ---
Analytical cost
As implemented
Logging a rating.
User work
푂(휆log푛+ 푏) ops
User-server comm. 2log푛(휆+8) +2푏bits
694 bytes
Server work
푂(푛log푛) ops
0.03 s
Server throughput
>270 queries/s
Checking that a matrix of ratings is well-formed.
Server-server comm.
4푏bits
64 bytes
Server work
푂(푚푛) ops
7.7 min
Fetching recommendations.
User-server comm.
푂(푛푏) bits
298 KB
User-perceived latency
0.38 s
Server work
푂(푛푑) ops
0.04 s
Server throughput
>110 queries/s
Table 8: Nudge’s costs for data collection (step 1) and fetching
recommendations (step 3) scale with the number of items 푛,
dimension 푑, bit length 푏of the ring, and PRF seed length 휆.
We report concrete costs on the Netflix data set (Table 6).
fetching recommendations requires a user to download 푂(푛)
bits from each server (concretely, 298 KB), which takes 0.38s.
The servers again handle hundreds of requests per second.
8
Extension: Scaling up Nudge
with dimensionality reduction
While Nudge can privately factor million-user data sets in
hours, Nudge’s compute grows as the product of users, items,
and embedding dimension 푑푚푛—which becomes a bottleneck
when applied to sufficiently massive data sets. (This issue
does not befall cleartext matrix-factorization systems: they
can take advantage of the matrix U’s inherent sparsity, whereas
the Nudge servers who only see secret shares of ⟦U⟧cannot.)
Nudge can overcome this scalability bottleneck with dimen-
sionality reduction via random projection [114]. Johnson and
Lindenstrauss [97] showed that projecting a matrix onto a
random, low-dimensional sketch S approximately preserves
the distances between its rows. Papadimitriou, Raghavan,
Tamaki, and Vempala [136, Theorem 4] showed that com-
pressing a matrix in this way before factoring it incurs only
a small loss in accuracy: for an error parameter 0 < 휖< 0.5,
the two-step process of (a) projecting the matrix U ∈R푚×푛
down to a smaller, sketched version ˆU := U · S ∈R푚×푠with
푠= Ω(log푛/휖2), and then (b) factoring ˆU, gives a (1 + 휖)-
approximation to factoring the original U (in Frobenius norm,
with appropriately chosen embedding dimension). Random
projection is a data-oblivious, linear computation, making it
well suited for multi-party computation.
Applying this technique, Nudge’s compute does not need to
scale as 푂(푑푚푛). Rather, the three Nudge servers can jointly
sample a sketch matrix S ∈R푛×푠, locally apply it to their secret
shares ⟦U⟧to obtain ⟦ˆU⟧:= ⟦U⟧· S, and run their private
matrix factorization on ⟦ˆU⟧from there. We describe this
process in the full version. Crucially, though the servers know
the sketch S, applying it to the matrix U on the right side treats
all users’ data symmetrically (and thus does not affect Nudge’s
anonymity property). As a result, Nudge’s compute can scale
as 푂(푚푛+ 푑푚log푛/휖2), or even 푂(푚√푛+ 푑푚log푛/휖2) with
more aggressive sparse sketching [108].
When the number of items 푛is sufficiently large, we expect
dimensionality reduction to give substantial improvements:
for example, on the Common Crawl data set with 364 M web
pages [140], sketching with standard parameters [1] shrinks
the dimension 푛= 364 M to down to 푠≤17,000. Running
Nudge at this scale would be bottlenecked by the cost of per-
forming two passes over the original matrix U ∈R푚×푛(one
to sketch it down at the beginning, and one to recover the item
embeddings at the end), not the time to perform private power
iteration on the 20,000× smaller matrix ˆU ∈R푚×푠.
9
Extension:
Enhancing Nudge’s privacy protections
Recommendations with differential privacy. A sequence
of works studies differentially private algorithms for princi-
pal component analysis [44, 60], low-rank matrix approxi-
mation [100], power iteration [23, 84, 85, 132], and matrix-
factorization-based recommendations [69,117,122,139,153].
Differential privacy offers the guarantee that the learned item
embeddings B cannot leak any one user’s rating vector with
high probability. This guarantee is complementary to the
privacy property provided by Nudge (that no party learns any-
thing about the user inputs beyond the item embeddings B),
and approaches to achieving it integrate neatly into Nudge.
In particular, Dwork et al. [60] show that, to achieve differ-
ential privacy, it suffices to add gaussian noise to each entry
of the matrix U⊤U ∈R푛×푛. Following this approach, Nudge
can provide differential privacy with two extra steps:
• After collecting ratings, the three Nudge servers normal-
ize each row of the matrix ⟦U⟧(by dividing the 푖th row
in ⟦U⟧by the number of ratings submitted by user 푖).
• Each pair of servers picks a matrix in R푛×푛with i.i.d.
gaussian entries and splits it across all three servers with
replicated secret sharing. (This requires no communi-
cation, using PRFs.) The servers sum these matrices to
⟦E⟧∈R푛×푛. At each step of power iteration, when the
servers compute Mul(⟦U⊤⟧,Mul(⟦U⟧,⟦v⟧)), they add
to this Mul(⟦E⟧,⟦v⟧). This incurs no communication.
On the Netflix data set [7], we measure that power iteration
extended in this way to provide (휖,훿)-differential privacy with
휖= 1 and 훿= 2−40 achieves a nDCG@20 score of 0.24 (as

--- Page 13 ---
defined in Section 7.1). McSherry and Mironov similarly con-
clude that retrofitting recommender systems with differential
privacy does not cause large degradations in quality [122].
Recommendations on aggregate data. To further prevent
user-level information from being revealed via the item em-
beddings B, certain use cases of Nudge could compute recom-
mendations over aggregate user data as opposed to individual
user data. To give an example: Nudge can first aggregate users
by zip code, and then provide private yet personalized recom-
mendations of the form “users in area X often click on Y.”
This would allow a private search engine [91] to rank websites
about local businesses, local governments, etc. higher if they
are geographically relevant to a user. One benefit is that the
dimension 푚would now correspond to the number of aggre-
gated user “categories” (rather than the total number of users),
letting Nudge factor a far smaller matrix. One limitation is
that the servers must know which users to aggregate over, so
this mapping cannot be based on highly sensitive data.
10
Discussion: Nudge applications
Nudge shows the potential viability of other applications:
Collaborative recommendations. With Nudge, multiple
services could jointly compute recommendations without ever
sharing user data. For example, Netflix, Hulu, and Disney+
could jointly train a recommendation model that leverages
ratings across all three platforms. Or, LinkedIn and Facebook
could compute friend recommendations across a joint version
of their social networks. Or, Amazon and Instagram could
compute recommendations across a user’s joint purchase and
watch history. In this setting, multiple non-colluding parties,
who could each run a Nudge server, already exist.
Beyond recommendation. Nudge’s core power-iteration algo-
rithm computes a low-rank approximation of a secret-shared
matrix. Low-rank matrix approximations form the computa-
tional backbone of data-mining tasks like principal component
analysis [88], information-retrieval tasks like learning low-
dimensional embeddings [55,136] and autoencoders [24,30],
link-analysis tasks like PageRank [82, 135], graph-analysis
tasks like spectral clustering [111], and data-compression
tasks like matrix denoising [94,99]. By expressing power iter-
ation as a matrix-vector program and optimizing its low-level
gates, Nudge shows that these applications could be executed
on large, secret-shared matrices, data sets, or graphs.
11
Related Work
Multiple approaches preserve user privacy in recommender
systems, with the goal of protecting the sensitive data needed
to train recommendation models [129].
A first approach relies on trusted execution environ-
ments [13, 56] but is vulnerable to attacks on the underly-
ing hardware [46, 76]. A second approach uses federated
learning [121] to share only intermediate model parameters
(not the original user data) with the recommender system,
though an honest-but-curious server may still deduce user rat-
ings [39,78,112,155]. Protocols combining federated learning
with secure aggregation [26,120,143] address this leakage, but
inherently involve all users in the many-round training process
and reveal intermediate model versions to users and servers. A
third approach uses cryptographic tools to ensure that no party
can learn users’ training data, as long as the two or more parties
processing the data do not collude [36,64,102,130,133,157].
As shown in Section 7.2, Nudge improves on the cost and
scale of these cryptographic systems. Other work assumes
pre-trained deep learning models exist, and shows how to pri-
vately serve recommendations given such public models [72].
Nudge, which at its core performs private matrix factor-
ization, is related to systems for privacy-preserving principal
component analysis [14,28,47,66,70]. The work of Cho et
al. [47] works in the same setting as Nudge but offers different
security guarantees: it uses leaky truncation protocols [38] and
random projection in a way that breaks user anonymity [51].
Other works [14,66,70] factor a matrix that is sharded across
a handful of parties (e.g., a few hospitals performing joint data
analysis), allowing them to perform many computations lo-
cally. In contrast, Nudge factors a matrix that depends on data
from potentially millions of users. Relative to the most per-
formant private PCA system [70], Nudge runs on two orders
of magnitude larger matrices.
Extensive research applies multi-party computation to pri-
vate ML inference and training across two parties [37, 41,
67, 79, 80, 87, 96, 98, 124–126, 146, 162, 165], three par-
ties [22,42,59,106,107,125,138,142,149,154,156,158–160],
or more [43,54,106,115]. Nudge diverges from these works
in that, rather than running general-purpose gradient descent,
it uses a simple algorithm from numerical linear algebra (Sec-
tion 5.1). Nevertheless, Nudge shares many common tech-
niques: using three parties to evaluate non-interactive matrix-
vector products [27,45,107,125,156,157] and function secret
sharing [32] for non-linear gates [12,33,79–81,96,147,149,
154,158,164]. Nudge contributes new three-party protocols
for truncation and normalization.
12
Conclusion
Nudge is a recommender system that provides strong privacy
by splitting trust across three servers. We show how matrix
factorization is well-suited to three-party computation, and
contribute an efficient and scalable design and implementation.
We leave open three questions: first, to provide malicious
security; second, to run across more parties while tolerating
the compromise of several of them; third, to serve private
recommendations with only two non-colluding parties without
harming Nudge’s performance.

--- Page 14 ---
Acknowledgments. We thank our anonymous shepherd and
the USENIX Security reviewers. We thank Sam Hopkins
and Ainesh Bakshi for conversations about matrix decomposi-
tion, Elette Boyle and Mayank Rathee for conversations about
three-party computation, David Wu for conversations about
private PCA, and Elaine Shi, Xiao Wang, Kartik Nayak, and
Adithya Vadapalli for conversations about related work. Nick-
olai Zeldovich, Mayank Rathee, Derek Leung, Ariel Szekely,
and Ryan Lehmkuhl provided feedback on an early draft. This
work was supported by gifts from Apple, Google, and Meta,
and NSF 2452708. Alexandra Henzinger was supported by
the NSF GRFP under Grant No. 2141064; this work was
done in part while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory
of Computing. Dan Boneh was supported by NSF SATC-
1804222.
Ethical Considerations
The stakeholders in this work include the authors, as well as
companies and organizations that may use Nudge to generate
recommendations and users that may submit ratings to Nudge.
We did not identify any significant potential harms to the au-
thors during the research process. For users that may submit
ratings to Nudge: Nudge provides stronger privacy properties
than deployed cleartext recommendation algorithms, where
the provider learns both the model and user ratings. One po-
tential harm is that, in Nudge, some information about user rat-
ings is revealed via the model, which is the output of Nudge’s
matrix-factorization protocol. We discuss how to mitigate this
with differential privacy in Section 9. For companies or orga-
nizations deploying Nudge: Nudge’s recommendation quality
is not as good as that of a neural-network-based approach (Fig-
ure 5), the cost of training the model is higher than on cleartext
data, and the protocol requires three non-colluding servers.
However, companies and organizations do not have access
to user ratings in the clear, which has the potential to reduce
liability, which may be particularly important for some appli-
cations. Upon weighing the potential benefits and harms of
our work using the principle of “beneficence” from the Menlo
Report [58], we concluded that the benefits of completing the
research outweighed the potential harms.
Open Science
Our
full
Nudge
system
code
is
open
sourced
at:
https://zenodo.org/records/17968761. We evaluate
Nudge on the released Netflix prize [7] and MovieLens [5]
data sets. We also use the size of existing recommender data
sets [6, 8, 61, 137, 163] to report Nudge’s performance on
matrices with the same dimensions.
References
[1] The johnson-lindenstrauss bound for embedding
with random projections.
scikit-learn.org/
stable/auto_examples/miscellaneous/plot_
johnson_lindenstrauss_bound.html.
[2] Prio server. github.com/divviup/prio-server.
[3] Spotify. github.com/spotify/annoy.
[4] Twitter’s recommendation algorithm. blog.x.com/
engineering/en_us/topics/open-source/
2023/twitter-recommendation-algorithm.
[5] Movielens 1m dataset. grouplens.org/datasets/
movielens/1m/, 2003.
[6] Criteo
dataset.
huggingface.co/datasets/
criteo/criteo-attribution-dataset, 2017.
[7] Netflix prize data.
www.kaggle.com/datasets/
netflix-inc/netflix-prize-data, 2019.
[8] Yelp
dataset.
www.kaggle.com/datasets/
yelp-dataset/yelp-dataset, 2022.
[9] Vertexai search for commerce,
manage models.
https://docs.cloud.google.com/retail/docs/manage-
models, 2025.
[10] Ittai Abraham, Benny Pinkas, and Avishay Yanai.
Blinder–scalable, robust anonymous committed broad-
cast. In ACM SIGSAC, 2020.
[11] Amit Agarwal, Elette Boyle, Niv Gilboa, Yuval Ishai,
Mahimna Kelkar, and Yiping Ma. Compressing unit-
vector correlations via sparse pseudorandom genera-
tors. In EUROCRYPT, 2024.
[12] Amit Agarwal, Stanislav Peceny, Mariana Raykova,
Phillipp Schoppmann, and Karn Seth. Communication-
efficient secure logistic regression. In EuroS&P, 2024.
[13] Esma Aïmeur, Gilles Brassard, José M Fernandez,
and Flavien Serge Mani Onana. Alambic: a privacy-
preserving recommender system for electronic com-
merce. Int. J. Inf. Secur., 7(5), 2008.
[14] Mohammad Al-Rubaie, Pei-yuan Wu, J Morris Chang,
and Sun-Yuan Kung.
Privacy-preserving PCA on
horizontally-partitioned data. In IEEE DSC, 2017.
[15] Bobby Allyn.
Google to delete search data
of millions who used ’incognito’ mode,
2024.
www.npr.org/2024/04/01/1242019127/google-
incognito-mode-settlement-search-history.

--- Page 15 ---
[16] Vito Walter Anelli, Alejandro Bellogín, Tommaso
Di Noia, Dietmar Jannach, and Claudio Pomo. Top-N
recommendation algorithms: A quest for the state-of-
the-art. In ACM UMAP, 2022.
[17] Apple and Google.
Exposure notification privacy-
preserving analytics (ENPA) white paper. 2021.
[18] Apple Inc. iCloud private relay overview. Technical
report, Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA, December 2021.
[19] Toshinori Araki, Assi Barak, Jun Furukawa, Marcel
Keller, Yehuda Lindell, Kazuma Ohara, and Hikaru
Tsuchida. Generalizing the SPDZ compiler for other
protocols. In CCS, 2018.
[20] Toshinori Araki, Jun Furukawa, Yehuda Lindell, Ariel
Nof, and Kazuma Ohara. High-throughput semi-honest
secure three-party computation with an honest majority.
In CCS, 2016.
[21] Apple Developer Article. Getting up-to-date calling
and blocking information for your app. developer.ap-
ple.com/documentation/identitylookup/getting-up-to-
date-calling-and-blocking-information-for-your-app.
[22] Nuttapong Attrapadung, Koki Hamada, Dai Ikarashi,
Ryo Kikuchi, Takahiro Matsuda, Ibuki Mishina, Hi-
raku Morita, and Jacob CN Schuldt. Adam in private:
Secure and fast training of deep neural networks with
adaptive moment estimation. arXiv:2106.02203, 2021.
[23] Maria-Florina Balcan, Simon Shaolei Du, Yining
Wang, and Adams Wei Yu.
An improved gap-
dependency analysis of the noisy power method. In
COLT, 2016.
[24] Pierre Baldi and Kurt Hornik. Neural networks and
principal component analysis: Learning from examples
without local minima. Neural networks, 2(1), 1989.
[25] Shafi Bashar and Alex Gillmor.
Scaling col-
laborative filtering with PySpark.
engineering-
blog.yelp.com/2018/05/scaling-collaborative-filtering-
with-pyspark.html, May 2018.
[26] James Bell-Clark, Adrià Gascón, Baiyu Li, Mariana
Raykova, and Phillipp Schoppmann. Willow: Secure
aggregation with one-shot clients. In CRYPTO, 2025.
[27] Remco Bloemen, Bryan Gillespie, Daniel Kales,
Philipp Sippl, and Roman Walch. Large-scale MPC:
Scaling private iris code uniqueness checks to millions
of users. arXiv:2405.04463, 2024.
[28] Dan Bogdanov, Liina Kamm, Sven Laur, and Ville
Sokk. Implementation and evaluation of an algorithm
for cryptographically private principal component anal-
ysis on genomic data. TCBB, 15(5), 2018.
[29] Dan Boneh, Elette Boyle, Henry Corrigan-Gibbs, Niv
Gilboa, and Yuval Ishai. Zero-knowledge proofs on
secret-shared data via fully linear PCPs. In CRYPTO,
2019.
[30] Hervé Bourlard and Yves Kamp. Auto-association by
multilayer perceptrons and singular value decomposi-
tion. Biological cybernetics, 59(4), 1988.
[31] Elette Boyle, Nishanth Chandran, Niv Gilboa, Di-
vya Gupta, Yuval Ishai, Nishant Kumar, and Mayank
Rathee. Function secret sharing for mixed-mode and
fixed-point secure computation.
In EUROCRYPT,
2021.
[32] Elette Boyle, Niv Gilboa, and Yuval Ishai. Function
secret sharing: Improvements and extensions. In CCS,
2016.
[33] Elette Boyle, Niv Gilboa, and Yuval Ishai. Secure
computation with preprocessing via function secret
sharing. In TCC, 2019.
[34] Justin Brickell and Vitaly Shmatikov. The cost of pri-
vacy: destruction of data-mining utility in anonymized
data publishing. In SIGKDD, 2008.
[35] Joseph A Calandrino, Ann Kilzer, Arvind Narayanan,
Edward W Felten, and Vitaly Shmatikov. ”You might
also like:” privacy risks of collaborative filtering. In
IEEE S&P, 2011.
[36] John Canny. Collaborative filtering with privacy via
factor analysis. In SIGIR, 2002.
[37] Sergiu Carpov, Kevin Deforth, Nicolas Gama, Mariya
Georgieva, Dimitar Jetchev, Jonathan Katz, Iraklis
Leontiadis, Mohsen Mohammadi, Abson Sae-Tang,
and Marius Vuille. Manticore: Efficient framework
for scalable secure multiparty computation protocols.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2021.
[38] Octavian Catrina and Amitabh Saxena. Secure compu-
tation with fixed-point numbers. In FC, 2010.
[39] Di Chai, Leye Wang, Kai Chen, and Qiang Yang. Se-
cure federated matrix factorization. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 36(5), 2020.
[40] Kelvin
Chan.
Tiktok
fined
$600
million
for
china
data
transfers
that
broke
eu
pri-
vacy
rules,
2025.
apnews.com/article/tiktok-
ireland-european-union-data-privacy-regulation-
d386ec74becc716905d7f686d6a448e2.
[41] Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Aseem Rastogi,
Rahul Sharma, and Shardul Tripathi.
EzPC: Pro-
grammable and efficient secure two-party computation
for machine learning. In EuroS&P, 2019.

--- Page 16 ---
[42] Harsh Chaudhari, Ashish Choudhury, Arpita Patra, and
Ajith Suresh. Astra: High throughput 3PC over rings
with application to secure prediction. In CCSW, 2019.
[43] Harsh Chaudhari, Rahul Rachuri, and Ajith Suresh.
Trident: Efficient 4pc framework for privacy preserving
machine learning. arXiv:1912.02631, 2019.
[44] Kamalika Chaudhuri, Anand D Sarwate, and Kaushik
Sinha.
A near-optimal algorithm for differentially-
private principal components. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 14(1), 2013.
[45] Hao Chen, Miran Kim, Ilya Razenshteyn, Dragos Ro-
taru, Yongsoo Song, and Sameer Wagh. Maliciously
secure matrix multiplication with applications to pri-
vate deep learning. In ASIACRYPT, 2020.
[46] Zitai Chen, Georgios Vasilakis, Kit Murdock, Edward
Dean, David Oswald, and Flavio D Garcia. VoltPil-
lager: Hardware-based fault injection attacks against
intel SGX enclaves using the SVID voltage scaling
interface. In USENIX Sec, 2021.
[47] Hyunghoon Cho, David J Wu, and Bonnie Berger. Se-
cure genome-wide association analysis using multi-
party computation. Nature biotechnology, 36(6), 2018.
[48] Benny Chor, Oded Goldreich, Eyal Kushilevitz, and
Madhu Sudan. Private information retrieval. In FOCS,
1995.
[49] Federal Trade Commission.
Google and youtube
will pay record $170 million for alleged violations
of children’s privacy law, 2019. www.ftc.gov/news-
events/news/press-releases/2019/09/google-youtube-
will-pay-record-170-million-alleged-violations-
childrens-privacy-law.
[50] Colin Cooper, Sang Hyuk Lee, Tomasz Radzik, and
Yiannis Siantos. Random walks in recommender sys-
tems: exact computation and simulations. In WWW,
2014.
[51] Henry Corrigan-Gibbs and Dan Boneh. Prio: Private,
robust, and scalable computation of aggregate statistics.
In NSDI, 2017.
[52] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. Deep
neural networks for youtube recommendations. In Rec-
Sys, 2016.
[53] Paolo Cremonesi, Yehuda Koren, and Roberto Turrin.
Performance of recommender algorithms on top-n rec-
ommendation tasks. In RecSys, 2010.
[54] Anders Dalskov, Daniel Escudero, and Marcel Keller.
Fantastic four: Honest-Majority Four-Party secure com-
putation with malicious security. In USENIX Sec, 2021.
[55] Scott Deerwester, Susan T Dumais, George W Furnas,
Thomas Landauer, and Richard Harshman. Indexing
by latent semantic analysis. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci., 41(6),
1990.
[56] Akash Dhasade, Nevena Dresevic, Anne-Marie Ker-
marrec, and Rafael Pires. TEE-based decentralized
recommender systems: The raw data sharing redemp-
tion. In IPDPS, 2022.
[57] Roger Dingledine, Nick Mathewson, and Paul Syver-
son. Tor: The second-generation onion router. In
USENIX Sec, 2004.
[58] David Dittrich and Erin Kenneally.
Annoy.
The
Menlo Report:
Ethical Principles Guiding Infor-
mation and Communication Technology Research,
2012.
catalog.caida.org/paper/2012_menlo_
report_actual_formatted.
[59] Ye Dong, Chen Xiaojun, Weizhan Jing, Li Kaiyun,
and Weiping Wang. Meteor: Improved secure 3-party
neural network inference with reducing online commu-
nication costs. In ACM Web Conference, 2023.
[60] Cynthia Dwork, Kunal Talwar, Abhradeep Thakurta,
and Li Zhang. Analyze gauss: optimal bounds for
privacy-preserving principal component analysis. In
STOC, 2014.
[61] Travis Ebesu, Bin Shen, and Yi Fang. Collaborative
memory network for recommendation systems. In SI-
GIR, 2018.
[62] Annie Edmundson.
The rise (and lessons learned)
of ML models to personalize content on home (part
i).
engineering.atspotify.com/2021/11/the-rise-and-
lessons-learned-of-ml-models-to-personalize-content-
on-home-part-i, 2021.
[63] Steven Englehardt. Next steps in privacy-preserving
telemetry
with
prio.
blog.mozilla.org/secu-
rity/2019/06/06/next-steps-in-privacy-preserving-
telemetry-with-prio/.
[64] Zekeriya Erkin, Michael Beye, Thijs Veugen, and Regi-
nald L Lagendijk. Efficiently computing private rec-
ommendations. In ICASSP, 2011.
[65] Daniel Escudero, Satrajit Ghosh, Marcel Keller, Rahul
Rachuri, and Peter Scholl.
Improved primitives
for MPC over mixed arithmetic-binary circuits. In
CRYPTO, 2020.
[66] Xiaoyu Fan, Guosai Wang, Kun Chen, Xu He, and Wei
Xu. PPCA: Privacy-preserving principal component
analysis using secure multiparty computation (MPC).
arXiv:2105.07612, 2021.

--- Page 17 ---
[67] Jun Feng, Yefan Wu, Hong Sun, Shunli Zhang, and
Debin Liu. Panther: Practical secure two-party neural
network inference. Trans. Info. For. Sec., 2025.
[68] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Simone Boglio, Paolo Cre-
monesi, and Dietmar Jannach. A troubling analysis of
reproducibility and progress in recommender systems
research. TOIS, 39(2), 2021.
[69] Arik Friedman, Shlomo Berkovsky, and Mohamed Ali
Kaafar. A differential privacy framework for matrix
factorization recommender systems. UMUAI, 26, 2016.
[70] David Froelicher, Hyunghoon Cho, Manaswitha Edu-
palli, Joao Sa Sousa, Jean-Philippe Bossuat, Apos-
tolos Pyrgelis, Juan R Troncoso-Pastoriza, Bonnie
Berger, and Jean-Pierre Hubaux. Scalable and privacy-
preserving federated principal component analysis. In
IEEE S&P, 2023.
[71] Srivatsava
Ranjit
Ganta,
Shiva
Prasad
Ka-
siviswanathan, and Adam Smith.
Composition
attacks and auxiliary information in data privacy. In
SIGKDD, 2008.
[72] Karthik Garimella, Austin Ebel, Gabrielle De Micheli,
and Brandon Reagen. HE-LRM: Encrypted deep learn-
ing recommendation models using fully homomorphic
encryption. arXiv:2506.18150, 2025.
[73] Adrià Gascón, Phillipp Schoppmann, Borja Balle, Mar-
iana Raykova, Jack Doerner, Samee Zahur, and David
Evans. Privacy-preserving distributed linear regression
on high-dimensional data. In PETS, 2017.
[74] Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. Matrix com-
putations. JHU press, 2013.
[75] Michael Greenacre, Patrick JF Groenen, Trevor Hastie,
Alfonso Iodice d’Enza, Angelos Markos, and Elena
Tuzhilina. Principal component analysis. Nature Re-
views Methods Primers, 2(1), 2022.
[76] Daniel Gruss, Moritz Lipp, Michael Schwarz, Daniel
Genkin, Jonas Juffinger, Sioli O’Connell, Wolfgang
Schoechl, and Yuval Yarom. Another flip in the wall
of Rowhammer defenses. In IEEE S&P, 2018.
[77] Tianyao Gu, Afonso Tinoco, Sri Harish Govinda Rajan,
and Elaine Shi. PicoGRAM: Practical garbled RAM
from Decisional Diffie-Hellman. In CRYPTO, 2025.
[78] Xiao Guo, Xiang Li, Xiangyu Chang, Shusen Wang,
and Zhihua Zhang. Fedpower: privacy-preserving dis-
tributed eigenspace estimation. Machine Learning,
113(11), 2024.
[79] Kanav Gupta, Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta,
Jonathan Katz, and Rahul Sharma. Shark: Actively
secure inference using function secret sharing. In IEEE
S&P, 2025.
[80] Kanav Gupta, Neha Jawalkar, Ananta Mukherjee, Nis-
hanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Ashish Panwar, and
Rahul Sharma. Sigma: Secure GPT inference with
function secret sharing. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
2023.
[81] Kanav Gupta, Deepak Kumaraswamy, Nishanth Chan-
dran, and Divya Gupta. Llama: A low latency math
library for secure inference. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
2022.
[82] Pankaj Gupta, Ashish Goel, Jimmy Lin, Aneesh
Sharma, Dong Wang, and Reza Zadeh. Wtf: The who
to follow service at twitter. In WWW, 2013.
[83] Nathan Halko, Per-Gunnar Martinsson, and Joel A
Tropp.
Finding structure with randomness: Proba-
bilistic algorithms for constructing approximate matrix
decompositions. SIAM review, 53(2), 2011.
[84] Moritz Hardt and Eric Price. The noisy power method:
A meta algorithm with applications. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 27, 2014.
[85] Moritz Hardt and Aaron Roth.
Beyond worst-case
analysis in private singular vector computation. In
STOC, 2013.
[86] Christopher Harth-Kitzerow, Ajith Suresh, and Georg
Carle. Truncation untangled: Scaling fixed-point arith-
metic for privacy-preserving machine learning to large
models and datasets. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2024.
[87] Christopher Harth-Kitzerow, Yongqin Wang, Rachit
Rajat, Georg Carle, and Murali Annavaram. PIGEON:
A high throughput framework for private inference of
neural networks using secure multiparty computation.
In PETS, 2025.
[88] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman,
and Jerome H Friedman. The elements of statistical
learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, vol-
ume 2. Springer, 2009.
[89] Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie,
Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng Chua. Neural collaborative fil-
tering. In WWW, 2017.
[90] Xinran He, Junfeng Pan, Ou Jin, Tianbing Xu, Bo Liu,
Tao Xu, Yanxin Shi, Antoine Atallah, Ralf Herbrich,
Stuart Bowers, et al. Practical lessons from predicting
clicks on ads at facebook. In AdKDD, 2014.

--- Page 18 ---
[91] Alexandra Henzinger, Emma Dauterman, Henry
Corrigan-Gibbs, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Private web
search with Tiptoe. In SOSP, 2023.
[92] Yifan Hu, Yehuda Koren, and Chris Volinsky. Collabo-
rative filtering for implicit feedback datasets. In ICDM,
2008.
[93] Nicolas Hug. Surprise: A python library for recom-
mender systems. J. Open Source Softw., 5(52), 2020.
[94] Prateek Jain, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Sujay Sanghavi.
Low-rank matrix completion using alternating mini-
mization. In STOC, 2013.
[95] Kalervo Järvelin and Jaana Kekäläinen. Cumulated
gain-based evaluation of ir techniques. ACM TOIS,
20(4), 2002.
[96] Neha Jawalkar, Kanav Gupta, Arkaprava Basu, Nis-
hanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, and Rahul Sharma.
Orca: FSS-based secure training and inference with
GPUs. In IEEE S&P, 2024.
[97] William B Johnson, Joram Lindenstrauss, et al. Exten-
sions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space. Con-
temporary mathematics, 26(1), 1984.
[98] Chiraag Juvekar, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Anantha
Chandrakasan. GAZELLE: A low latency framework
for secure neural network inference. In USENIX Sec,
2018.
[99] Samruddhi Kahu and Reena Rahate. Image compres-
sion using singular value decomposition. IJOART, 2(8),
2013.
[100] Michael Kapralov and Kunal Talwar. On differentially
private low rank approximation. In SODA, 2013.
[101] Marcel Keller. MP-SPDZ: A versatile framework for
multi-party computation. In ACM SIGSAC, 2020.
[102] Jinsu Kim, Dongyoung Koo, Yuna Kim, Hyunsoo
Yoon, Junbum Shin, and Sungwook Kim. Efficient
privacy-preserving matrix factorization for recommen-
dation via fully homomorphic encryption. TOPS, 21(4),
2018.
[103] Brian Knott, Shobha Venkataraman, Awni Hannun,
Shubho Sengupta, Mark Ibrahim, and Laurens van der
Maaten. Crypten: Secure multi-party computation
meets machine learning. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
[104] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. Ma-
trix factorization techniques for recommender systems.
Computer, 42(8), 2009.
[105] Stan Korzilius and Berry Schoenmakers. Divisions
and square roots with tight error analysis from newton–
raphson iteration in secure fixed-point arithmetic. Cryp-
tography, 7(3), 2023.
[106] Nishat Koti, Mahak Pancholi, Arpita Patra, and
Ajith Suresh. SWIFT: Super-fast and robust privacy-
preserving machine learning. In USENIX Sec, 2021.
[107] Nishant Kumar, Mayank Rathee, Nishanth Chandran,
Divya Gupta, Aseem Rastogi, and Rahul Sharma.
Cryptflow: Secure tensorflow inference. In IEEE S&P,
2020.
[108] Ping Li, Trevor J Hastie, and Kenneth W Church. Very
sparse random projections. In SIGKDD, 2006.
[109] Yun Li, Yufei Duan, Zhicong Huang, Cheng Hong,
Chao Zhang, and Yifan Song. Efficient 3PC for binary
circuits with application to Maliciously-Secure DNN
inference. In USENIX Sec, 2023.
[110] Dawen Liang, Rahul G Krishnan, Matthew D Hoff-
man, and Tony Jebara. Variational autoencoders for
collaborative filtering. In WWW, 2018.
[111] Frank Lin and William W Cohen. Power iteration
clustering. 2010.
[112] Guanyu Lin, Feng Liang, Weike Pan, and Zhong Ming.
Fedrec: Federated recommendation with explicit feed-
back. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 36(5):21–30, 2020.
[113] Yehuda Lindell. How to simulate it–a tutorial on the
simulation proof technique. Tutorials on the Founda-
tions of Cryptography., 2017.
[114] Nathan Linial, Eran London, and Yuri Rabinovich. The
geometry of graphs and some of its algorithmic appli-
cations. Combinatorica, 15(2), 1995.
[115] Fengrun Liu, Xiang Xie, and Yu Yu. Scalable multi-
party computation protocols for machine learning in
the honest-majority setting. In USENIX Sec, 2024.
[116] Hanlin Liu, Xiao Wang, Kang Yang, and Yu Yu. BitGC:
garbled circuits with 1 bit per gate. In EUROCRYPT,
2025.
[117] Ziqi Liu, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander Smola. Fast
differentially private matrix factorization. In RecSys,
2015.
[118] Wen-jie Lu, Yixuan Fang, Zhicong Huang, Cheng
Hong, Chaochao Chen, Hunter Qu, Yajin Zhou, and
Kui Ren.
Faster secure multiparty computation of
adaptive gradient descent. In Workshop on Privacy-
Preserving Machine Learning in Practice, 2020.

--- Page 19 ---
[119] Hidde Lycklama, Lukas Burkhalter, Alexander Viand,
Nicolas Küchler, and Anwar Hithnawi. Rofl: Robust-
ness of secure federated learning. In IEEE S&P.
[120] Yiping Ma, Jess Woods, Sebastian Angel, Antigoni
Polychroniadou, and Tal Rabin. Flamingo: Multi-round
single-server secure aggregation with applications to
private federated learning. In IEEE S&P, 2023.
[121] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth
Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communication-
efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, 2017.
[122] Frank McSherry and Ilya Mironov. Differentially pri-
vate recommender systems: Building privacy into the
netflix prize contenders. In ACM SIGKDD, 2009.
[123] RV Mises and Hilda Pollaczek-Geiringer. Praktische
verfahren der gleichungsauflösung. ZAMM-Journal of
Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, 9(1), 1929.
[124] Pratyush Mishra, Ryan Lehmkuhl, Akshayaram Srini-
vasan, Wenting Zheng, and Raluca Ada Popa. Delphi:
A cryptographic inference system for neural networks.
In USENIX Sec, 2020.
[125] Payman Mohassel and Peter Rindal. ABY3: A mixed
protocol framework for machine learning. In CCS,
2018.
[126] Payman Mohassel and Yupeng Zhang. SecureML: A
system for scalable privacy-preserving machine learn-
ing. In IEEE S&P, 2017.
[127] Kit Murdock, David Oswald, Flavio D Garcia,
Jo Van Bulck, Daniel Gruss, and Frank Piessens. Plun-
dervolt: Software-based fault injection attacks against
Intel SGX. In IEEE S&P, 2020.
[128] Christopher
Musco.
The
power
method
and
spectral
methods
for
graph
partitioning.
www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/
fall18/cos521/Lectures/lec14.pdf, 2018.
[129] Arvind Narayanan and Vitaly Shmatikov. Robust de-
anonymization of large sparse datasets. In IEEE S&P,
2008.
[130] Kartik Nayak, Xiao Shaun Wang, Stratis Ioannidis, Udi
Weinsberg, Nina Taft, and Elaine Shi. GraphSC: Par-
allel secure computation made easy. In IEEE S&P,
2015.
[131] Lily Hay Newman.
A new google+ blunder
exposed
data
from
52.5
million
users,
2018.
www.wired.com/story/google-plus-bug-52-million-
users-data-exposed/.
[132] Julien Nicolas, César Sabater, Mohamed Maouche, So-
nia Ben Mokhtar, and Mark Coates. Differentially
private and decentralized randomized power method.
arXiv:2411.01931, 2024.
[133] Valeria Nikolaenko, Stratis Ioannidis, Udi Weinsberg,
Marc Joye, Nina Taft, and Dan Boneh.
Privacy-
preserving matrix factorization. In CCS, 2013.
[134] Valeria Nikolaenko, Udi Weinsberg, Stratis Ioanni-
dis, Marc Joye, Dan Boneh, and Nina Taft. Privacy-
preserving ridge regression on hundreds of millions of
records. In IEEE S&P, 2013.
[135] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and
Terry Winograd. The pagerank citation ranking: Bring-
ing order to the web. 1999.
[136] Christos H Papadimitriou, Hisao Tamaki, Prabhakar
Raghavan, and Santosh Vempala. Latent semantic in-
dexing: A probabilistic analysis. In PODS, 1998.
[137] Apurva Pathak, Kshitiz Gupta, and Julian McAuley.
Generating and personalizing bundle recommendations
on steam. In SIGIR, 2017.
[138] Arpita Patra and Ajith Suresh. BLAZE: Blazing fast
privacy-preserving machine learning. In NDSS, 2020.
[139] Huseyin Polat and Wenliang Du. SVD-based collabo-
rative filtering with privacy. In SAC, 2005.
[140] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer
learning with a unified text-to-text transformer, 2019.
arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
[141] Deevashwer Rathee, Mayank Rathee, Rahul Kranti Ki-
ran Goli, Divya Gupta, Rahul Sharma, Nishanth Chan-
dran, and Aseem Rastogi. SiRNN: A math library for
secure RNN inference. In IEEE S&P, 2021.
[142] Deevashwer Rathee, Mayank Rathee, Nishant Kumar,
Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Aseem Rastogi, and
Rahul Sharma. Cryptflow2: Practical 2-party secure
inference. In ACM SIGSAC, 2020.
[143] Mayank Rathee, Conghao Shen, Sameer Wagh, and
Raluca Ada Popa. Elsa: Secure aggregation for fed-
erated learning with malicious actors. In IEEE S&P,
2023.
[144] Steffen Rendle, Walid Krichene, Li Zhang, and John
Anderson. Neural collaborative filtering vs. matrix
factorization revisited. In RecSys, 2020.

--- Page 20 ---
[145] Steffen Rendle, Walid Krichene, Li Zhang, and Yehuda
Koren. Revisiting the performance of iALS on item
recommendation benchmarks. In RecSys, 2022.
[146] M Sadegh Riazi, Christian Weinert, Oleksandr
Tkachenko, Ebrahim M Songhori, Thomas Schneider,
and Farinaz Koushanfar. Chameleon: A hybrid secure
computation framework for machine learning applica-
tions. In ASIACCS, 2018.
[147] Théo Ryffel, Pierre Tholoniat, David Pointcheval,
and Francis Bach. Ariann: Low-interaction privacy-
preserving deep learning via function secret sharing.
arXiv:2006.04593, 2020.
[148] Yousef Saad. Numerical methods for large eigenvalue
problems: revised edition. SIAM, 2011.
[149] Manuel B. Santos, Dimitris Mouris, Mehmet Ugurbil,
Stanislaw Jarecki, José Reis, Shubho Sengupta, and
Miguel de Vega. Curl: Private LLMs through wavelet-
encoded look-up tables. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2024/1127, 2024.
[150] Badrul Sarwar, George Karypis, Joseph Konstan, and
John Riedl. Item-based collaborative filtering recom-
mendation algorithms. In WWW, 2001.
[151] Noam Scheiber and Mike Isaac.
Facebook
halts ad targeting cited in bias complaints, 2019.
www.nytimes.com/2019/03/19/technology/facebook-
discrimination-ads.html.
[152] Hans-Rudolf Schwarz. Methode der finiten Elemente,
volume 47. Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[153] Yilin Shen and Hongxia Jin. Privacy-preserving person-
alized recommendation: An instance-based approach
via differential privacy. In ICDM, 2014.
[154] Kyle Storrier, Adithya Vadapalli, Allan Lyons, and
Ryan Henry. Grotto: Screaming fast (2 + 1)-PC for
Z2푛via (2, 2)-DPFs. In CSS, 2023.
[155] Zehua Sun, Yonghui Xu, Yong Liu, Wei He, Lanju
Kong, Fangzhao Wu, Yali Jiang, and Lizhen Cui. A
survey on federated recommendation systems. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw., 36(1), 2024.
[156] Sijun Tan, Brian Knott, Yuan Tian, and David J. Wu.
CryptGPU: Fast privacy-preserving machine learning
on the gpu. In IEEE S&P, 2021.
[157] Adithya Vadapalli, Fattaneh Bayatbabolghani, and
Ryan Henry. You may also like... privacy: Recom-
mendation systems meet PIR. PETS, 2021.
[158] Sameer Wagh. Pika: Secure computation using func-
tion secret sharing over rings. PETS, 2022.
[159] Sameer Wagh, Divya Gupta, and Nishanth Chandran.
Securenn: 3-party secure computation for neural net-
work training. PETS, 2019.
[160] Sameer Wagh, Shruti Tople, Fabrice Benhamouda,
Eyal Kushilevitz, Prateek Mittal, and Tal Rabin. Fal-
con: Honest-majority maliciously secure framework
for private deep learning. In PETS, 2021.
[161] Hao Wang, Naiyan Wang, and Dit-Yan Yeung. Col-
laborative deep learning for recommender systems. In
SIGKDD, 2015.
[162] Jean-Luc Watson, Sameer Wagh, and Raluca Ada Popa.
Piranha: A GPU platform for secure computation. In
USENIX Sec, 2022.
[163] Fangzhao Wu, Ying Qiao, Jiun-Hung Chen, Chuhan
Wu, Tao Qi, Jianxun Lian, Danyang Liu, Xing Xie,
Jianfeng Gao, Winnie Wu, et al. Mind: A large-scale
dataset for news recommendation. In Annual meeting
of the association for computational linguistics, 2020.
[164] Peng Yang, Zoe Lin Jiang, Shiqi Gao, Hongxiao Wang,
Jun Zhou, Yangyiye Jin, Siu-Ming Yiu, and Junbin
Fang. FssNN: communication-efficient secure neural
network training via function secret sharing. Cryptol-
ogy ePrint Archive, 2023.
[165] Peng Yang, Zoe Lin Jiang, Shiqi Gao, Hongxiao Wang,
Jun Zhou, Yangyiye Jin, Siu-Ming Yiu, and Junbin
Fang. Communication-efficient secure neural network
via key-reduced distributed comparison function. In
ProvSec, 2025.
[166] Martin Zbudila, Erik Pohle, Aysajan Abidin, and Bart
Preneel. Master: maliciously secure truncation for
replicated secret sharing without pre-processing. In
CANS, 2024.
[167] Shijie Zhang, Wei Yuan, and Hongzhi Yin. Compre-
hensive privacy analysis on federated recommender
system against attribute inference attacks. IEEE Trans.
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 36(3), 2023.
[168] Lijing Zhou, Qingrui Song, Su Zhang, Ziyu Wang,
Xianggui Wang, and Yong Li.
Bicoptor 2.0:
Addressing challenges in probabilistic truncation
for enhanced privacy-preserving machine learning.
arXiv:2309.04909, 2023.
